

Endorsement 

 
 
 
SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY BUREAU 
INNOVATIONS AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT GROUP 
               
 
 
DRN :STB-06-2026-000117-E  
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY FOR THE UNDERSECRETARY  
  
SUBJECT : 
SUBMISSION OF PILOT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL OF THE 
PROJECT ARUGA 
DATE : 01 JUNE 2026   
 
Summary: 
 
This is to respectfully submit to the Undersecretary the Pilot Implementation Manual of the 
Project Aruga. This manual will serve as a guide to the implementers of the Project in all pilot 
implementation sites which includes the procedural processes of implementing the project 
activities. 
 
Action Needed: 
 
For the Undersecretary's  approval and further instruction.   
 
 
LIST OF ATTACHMENTS 
 
1) Memorandum Transmittal; and 
2) Pilot Implementation Manual of The Project Aruga 
 
 
PREPARED BY: RECOMMENDED BY: 
 
 
 
 
JAYSON D. OABEL  
Social Welfare Officer V/ Chief,  
Pilot Implementation Division 
MARILYN B. MORAL 
Director III 
Social Technology Bureau  
 
    
FOR USE OF THE OFFICE OF THE UNDERSECRETARY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMILIA J. MONTEVERDE  
Executive Assistant IV 
PAGE 1 of  1 
DSWD Central Office, IBP Road, Batasan Complex, Quezon City, Philippines (1126) 
Website: http://www.dswd.gov.ph
 Tel Nos. / Telefax: (632) 8 951-712 

 
 
 
SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY BUREAU 
INNOVATIONS AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT GROUP 
               
 
 
 
DRN: STB-06-2026-000117-E 
MEMORANDUM  
 
FOR : UNDERSECRETARY EDUARDO M. PUNAY  
Innovations and Program Development Group 
  
FROM : THE DIRECTOR III  
 
SUBJECT : SUBMISSION OF PILOT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL OF THE 
PROJECT ARUGA 
  
DATE : 01 JUNE 2026 
 
 
This is to respectfully submit to the Undersecretary the Pilot Implementation Manual of 
Project ARUGA. 
 
The Manual serves as the primary reference guide for the implementation of Project ARUGA 
across nine (9) pilot regions. It provides the standards and procedures for the 
implementation of project activities, sets the parameters for budget allocations under the 
various project mechanisms, and clarifies the roles and responsibilities of the Department, 
National Government Agency and Civil Society Organization partners, and Local 
Government Units (LGUs) serving as implementation sites. 
 
The Manual is intended to promote a uniform and coordinated approach in project 
implementation and ensure the effective delivery of interventions and services to target 
beneficiaries. 
 
For the Undersecretary's information and further instructions.  
 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
MARILYN B. MORAL 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED/ DISAPPROVED BY: 
 
 
 
EDUARDO M. PUNAY 
Undersecretary for Innovations and Program Development 
 
 
 
PAGE 1 of  1 
DSWD Central Office, IBP Road, Batasan Complex, Quezon City, Philippines (1126) 
Website: http://www.dswd.gov.ph
 Tel Nos. / Telefax: (632) 8 951-712 

 
Manual of Enhanced 
Guidelines 
 

  
               
 
 
 
 
PROJECT ARUGA 
 
PILOT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CY 2026 
 
 
 
 

 
Copyright 2026 
 
Published by  
Department of Social Welfare and Development - Social Technology Bureau 
Quezon City, Philippines 
E-mail Address: soctech@dswd.gov.ph |  Telephone Number: (02) 8931-81-44 
 
Contributors: 
 
Kevin Antonio Bumagat, SWO IV - Team Leader  
Fredelyn B. Alcancia, PDO III - Team Member  
Honey Grace R. Ruance, SWO III - Team Member  
Darren James N. Perello, PDO III - Team Member 
  
 
Editorial Board: 
 
Eduardo M. Punay 
Undersecretary for Innovations and Program Development 
 
Atty. Baldr H. Bringas 
Assistant Secretary for Innovations 
 
Helen Y. Suzara 
Bureau Director IV   
 
Marilyn B. Moral 
Assistant Bureau Director III  
 
Jayson D. Oabel 
Chief, Pilot Implementation Division  
 
Suggested Citation:  
 
DSWD Social Technology Bureau. (2026). Project Aruga Pilot Implementation 
Manual. Quezon City, Philippines. 
 
Please continue helping us guide other practitioners by sending us feedback at 
soctech@dswd.gov.ph  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 1 
CHAPTER I 2 
RATIONALE 2 
CHAPTER II 4 
LEGAL BASES 4 
DEFINITION OF TERMS 5 
CHAPTER III 8 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 8 
OBJECTIVES 8 
SCOPE AND COVERAGE 8 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES 8 
CHAPTER IV 12 
PROJECT APPROACHES 12 
CHAPTER V 13 
IMPLEMENTING PROCEDURES 13 
CHAPTER VI 37 
REPORTING AND DOCUMENTATION 37 
CHAPTER VII 38 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 38 
 
 

 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AICS                          Assistance to Individual in Crisis Situations  
BCPC              Barangay Council for the Protection of Children  
COP              Compliance Officer for Privacy  
CO             Central Office  
CIP                             Crisis Intervention Program  
CWD                          Children with Disability  
CHO                           City Health Office 
DARECARE          Development Assessment Rehabilitation and Empowerment of  
Children with Disabilities    
DPO    Data Protection Officer  
DPA                            Data Privacy Act 
DEPED   Department of Education  
DOH    Department of Health  
DILG                           Department of Local Government 
DSA    Disability Support Allowance  
DSWD   Department of Social Welfare and Development  
DPO    Data Protection Officer  
EDPID                        Early Detection Prevention and Intervention for Disability 
EO   Executive Order 
FO    Field Office  
FO PMT   Field Office Project Management Team  
GL                              Guarantee Letter 
ILRC    Inclusive Learning Resource Center  
IS    Information System  
LCE    Local Chief Executive  
LGU    Local Government Unit  
LPI    Local Project Implementers                             
LSWDO   Local Social Welfare and Development Officers  
MOA    Memorandum of Agreement  
MOV   Means of Verification 
NCDA    National Council on Disability Affairs  
NDA    Non-Disclosure Agreement  
SBCC    Social Behavior Change Communication  
SLP                            Sustainable Livelihood Program 
ST    Social Technology  
STB    Social Technology Bureau  
STU/S    Social Technology Unit/ Section  
TESDA   Technical Education and Skills Development Authority  
UN    United Nations  
UNICEF   United Nations Children’s Fund  
PID                             Pilot Implementation Division 
PSA                            Philippine Statistics Authority  
PDAO               Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office  
PDPB                          Policy Development and Planning Bureau 
PSB    Protective Services Bureau  
PMT                            Project Management Team 
PHILHEALTH   Philippine Health Insurance Corporation  
PHILSYS   Philippine Identification System  
PWD    Persons with Disability  
PRPWD                      Philippine Registry of Persons with Disability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   1 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
RATIONALE  
 
The Philippines has been one of the first countries to recognize the rights of Persons with 
Disabilities with a law on accessibility enacted in 1983, followed by the Magna Carta for 
Persons with Disabilities in 1992 (Republic Act No. 7277), which was amended accordingly 
to facilitate compliance with the Act and to achieve its objectives. The Philippines also 
ratified the United Nations (UN) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 
2008 and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1990, alongside regional 
commitments, including the Incheon Strategy “to Make the Right Real” for Persons with 
Disabilities in Asia and the Pacific. 
 
Despite a strong legal basis, implementation of the rights of Persons with Disabilities is 
falling behind, and supporting programs lack adequate coverage and depth. The emerging 
picture is that there is still lack of proper accountability and coordination in the provision of 
services for Children with Disabilities, that some of the services have low coverage (e.g., 
lack of assistive devices), and that the discount and preferential treatment that persons with 
disability should have (not paying VAT and 20% discount on medicines, medical fees, 
transportation, restaurant and certain recreational expenses, together with a 5% discount on 
essential items) often does not materialize. 
 
Based on the data from the Department of Social Welfare and  Development (DSWD), there 
are 89,261 Children with Disabilities belonging to poor households in the Philippines. 
Further, the current database of the DSWD only includes indicators for physical disability; 
thus, this number may still increase if psychosocial, cognitive, and other forms of disabilities 
are included. 
 
The DSWD and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) conducted the Study on the 
Cost of Raising Children with Disabilities in the Philippines, which was completed and 
launched in December 2022. The study aimed to quantify the extra monetary costs faced by 
households with Children with Disabilities and define such extra costs in relation to 
achieving living standards in comparison to other households with children. Although the 
study is not a disability prevalence survey, selecting children with a disability identification 
(ID) card using a rigorous sampling strategy provided an estimate of the total number of 
children with a disability ID card in the Philippines, which is estimated to be 325,000 
children. Moreover, it also revealed that the poverty rate is 50% higher for households with 
Children with Disabilities.  
 
Accordingly, the main source of extra costs of raising Children with Disabilities is 
health-related expenses. Estimates point to an extra cost of raising Children with Disabilities, 
requiring equivalence scales for children with functional difficulties that range from 1.4 to 1.8, 
implying that such children require expenditures that are 40% to 80% higher than those for 
other children. Against an average extra cost at the household level of 10% to 20%, even for 
those who have and use the disability card or receive cash transfers, the support is only a 
fraction of what would be required. Moreover, the study also found evidence of substantial 
unmet needs, which do not materialize in costs and would require service provision. These 
unmet needs include the failure to enroll in school, evidence of forgotten health treatment 
and consultations, and a lack of provision of assistive devices.  
 
The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), in partnership with the 
UNICEF Philippine Country Office, developed and pilot-tested Project Aruga in four (4) local 
government units, namely: Laoag City, Ilocos Norte; Puerto Princesa, Palawan; San Jose de 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   2 

 
Buenavista, Antique; and Sta. Cruz, Davao del Sur. In 2026, with the support of the 
Australian Government, the Project was evaluated, and it was concluded that Project Aruga 
has strong potential for expansion. However, scaling up will require a clearer delivery 
system, simpler documentation and cash support processes, stronger referral tracking and 
partnerships, better support for frontliners and primary caregivers, and stronger integration 
into LGU policy, budget, and coordination systems. 
 
It is in this context that the Social Technology Bureau (STB), as the program development 
arm of the DSWD, has redesigned the Project’s components and its corresponding 
mechanisms by iterating the processes of Project design and testing as further provided by 
DSWD Administrative Order No. 14, series of 2018 or the “Omnibus Guidelines in Social 
Technology Development”. The Project is deemed for implementation in five (5) more Local 
Government Units with the highest concentration of Children with Disabilities in order to 
validate the reliability and validity of the mechanisms as recommended by the Project 
Evaluation prior to its full institutionalization.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   3 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
LEGAL BASES 
 
A. International Instruments  
 
1) Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) highlights the rights of all 
individuals, particularly the Persons with Disabilities;  
 
2) United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CRPD) provides the core international treaty, adopted in 2006, ensuring 
disabled individuals or Persons with Disabilities to enjoy all human rights on 
an equal basis with others, including legal capacity, accessibility, and 
reasonable accommodation;  
 
3) United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child  defines the core 
rights of the child namely, survival, protection, development, and participation; 
and  
 
4) The Incheon Strategy “to Make the Right Real” for Persons with 
Disabilities in Asia and the Pacific sets regionally agreed, 
disability-inclusive development goals for 2013–2022 and aims to improve the 
lives of 650 million+ people with disabilities through 10 goals, 27 targets, and 
62 indicators, covering areas like poverty reduction, employment, and political 
participation. 
 
 
B. National Laws and Issuances  
 
1) Presidential Decree 603 otherwise known as the “Child and Youth Welfare 
Code” highlights the rights of children and youth, recognizing their inherent 
worth and dignity, and provides that all children with disabilities are entitled to 
treatment, education, and care suited to their needs;  
 
2) Republic Act No. 7277 or the “Magna Carta for Persons with Disabilities” 
recognizes Persons with Disabilities’ right to equal opportunities and prohibits 
acts of discrimination in employment, education, health , transportation, and 
public services;  
 
3) Republic Act No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code of 1991” transfers 
significant powers, responsibilities (health, social welfare, public works, etc.) 
and resources from the national government to local government units for 
basic service delivery and development;  
 
4) Republic Act No. 10070, amending Republic Act No. 7277 intensifies the 
systematic and localized mechanisms in providing services among Persons 
with Disabilities at the local government level through the creation of Persons 
with Disabilities Affairs Office in every province, city, and municipality in the 
country; 
  
5) Republic Act No. 11223 or the “Universal Health Care Act” provides that 
all Filipinos should have access to a comprehensive set of quality, 
cost-effective, promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitation, and palliative 
health care services without causing financial problems and hardships and 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   4 

 
prioritizes the needs of the population who cannot afford services;  
 
6) Republic Act No. 10754 or the “Act Expanding the Benefits and 
Privileges of Persons with Disabilities” ensures persons with disability the 
opportunity to participate fully into the mainstream of society by granting them 
at least twenty (20%) discount and exemption from the value-added tax on 
the sale of certain goods and services identified under Republic Act No. 9442 
for the exclusive use, enjoyment or availment of persons with disability;  
 
7) Republic Act No. 10533 or the “Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013”  
creates a functional basic education system that will develop productive and 
responsible citizens equipped with the essential competencies, skills, and 
values for both lifelong learning and employment and that will be inclusive for 
learners with disabilities;  
 
8) Republic  Act No. 11650 or the "Instituting a Policy of Inclusion and 
Services for Learners with Disabilities in Support of Inclusive Education 
Act" mandates that all public and private schools provide inclusive education 
to learners with disabilities (LWDs) by ensuring free, quality, and equitable 
access to basic education, establishing Inclusive Learning Resource Centers 
(ILRCs) nationwide to provide support,, early intervention, and individualized 
education plans;  
 
9) Republic Act No. 6727 or the “Wage Rationalization Act of 1989” 
established a decentralized, regional-based mechanism for setting minimum 
wages  based on regional living costs, poverty thresholds, and economic 
conditions, rather than a single national rate;  
 
10) Republic Act No. 10173 otherwise known as “Data Privacy Act of 2012”  
ensures that the personal data and information acquired from individuals 
must be secured and protected; and  
 
11) Republic Act No. 11315 or the “Community-based Monitoring System 
Act” mandates the nationwide collection of disaggregated, localized, and 
up-to-date data to improve poverty alleviation efforts and development 
planning in the Philippines. 
 
 
C. Department Issuance 
 
1) DSWD Administrative Order No. 02, series of 2024 or the “Adoption and 
Implementation of DSWD Strategic Plan for 2024-2028” ensures the  
availability and accessibility of social welfare programs and  services that 
clients' immediate needs towards strengthening social protection systems.  
 
 
DEFINITION OF TERMS 
 
1) Auxiliary Caregivers – for the purpose of this Pilot Implementation Manual, refers to 
identified willing individuals within the community who will be trained to assist the 
primary caregivers in providing care and support for children with disabilities. 
 
2) Auxiliary Services – for the purpose of this Pilot Implementation Manual, refers to 
the additional support services that complement the primary activities of Project 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   5 

 
Aruga enhancing its overall impact and ensuring that beneficiaries receive holistic 
care and support.  
 
3) Case Management – refers to a systematic process used to assist beneficiaries in 
overcoming challenges and improving their well-being that aims to empower 
beneficiaries by helping them navigate and access a range of social services, 
providing tailored support, and ensuring that interventions are responsive to their 
unique needs. 
 
4) Case Manager – refers to the Social Worker identified by the local government unit 
to facilitate and oversee the case management process of children with disabilities 
and their families following DSWD’s established standards, policies, and procedures 
provided by DSWD Pilot Implementation Manual No. 02, series of 2008.  
 
5) Disability Support Allowance – for the purpose of this Pilot Implementation 
Manual, refers to the monetary-based assistance amounting to P2,000.00 which will 
be provided to eligible children with disabilities and their families regularly to 
augment the extra costs to meet their basic needs, along with health, education, 
nutrition, transportation and among others. 
 
6) Home Care and Community Support Services – for the purpose of this Pilot 
Implementation Manual, refers to the provision of support by the Auxiliary Caregivers 
to the families of children with disabilities in providing care to the child, such as 
ensuring the child eats, good hygiene, among others, that would enable their parents 
and/or recognized caregivers to attend to work.  
 
7) Local Project Implementers – for the purpose of this Pilot Implementation Manual, 
refers to the focal persons in the local government unit and partner stakeholders at 
the provincial and regional level who are responsible for executing the project and 
are often the key actors who interact directly with the target communities, delivering 
services, support, and interventions based on the project's goals. 
 
8) Philippine Registry of Persons with Disability (PRPWD) – the national database 
managed by the Department of Health (DOH) designed to collect, store, and manage 
information on persons with disabilities across the country. 
 
9) Persons with Disability – refers to individuals with long-term physical, mental, 
intellectual, or sensory impairments that, when interacting with various barriers, 
hinder their full, equal participation in society.   
 
10) Project Aruga Profiling and Assessment Tool - a baseline and assessment tool 
that aims to collect identifying information and current conditions of potential children  
with disabilities and their household in consideration to access to Housing, Sanitation 
and Water, Health, Education and Economic Capacity.  
 
11) Project Management Team – for the purpose of this Pilot Implementation Manual, 
refers to the team within the DSWD who are responsible for overseeing the 
successful planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of Project Aruga, 
ensuring that all objectives are met, and the children with disabilities and their 
families receive the intended services and support. 
 
12) Reasonable Accommodation – refers to necessary and appropriate modifications 
or adjustments made in the workplace, educational institutions, or other public or 
private services to ensure that individuals with disabilities or specific needs have 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   6 

 
equal access to opportunities without imposing disproportionate or undue burden on 
the entity providing them. 
 
13) Referral Network – a structured system of service providers and organizations that 
collaborate to ensure that children and their families can access the appropriate 
services, support, and resources they need. 
 
14) Referral Pathway – refers to a coordinated system of processes that guides children 
with disabilities and their families to access appropriate services and support. The 
pathway outlines the steps and connections needed to ensure that the children with 
disabilities and their families receive care and support from various partners that are 
part of the referral network.  
 
15) Social and Behavior Change Communication – refers to a collection of 
communication approaches, activities, and tools used to positively influence 
behaviors among the project beneficiaries, general public, and partner stakeholders. 
 
16) Social Case Management – refers to the structured and systematic process used 
by social workers to assess, plan, implement, coordinate, monitor, and evaluate 
services for the children with disabilities and families in need.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   7 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION  
 
OBJECTIVES 
 
This Pilot Implementation Manual seeks to:  
 
1) Provide standards and procedures for implementation the Project Aruga in nine (9) 
regions;  
2) Set parameters on  budget allocations in the implementation of the different 
mechanisms under the Project; and  
3) Clarify the roles and responsibilities of the DSWD, National Government Agency 
and Civil Society Organization partners and Local Government Units (LGUs) as 
implementation sites. 
  
SCOPE AND COVERAGE 
 
This Pilot Implementation Manual is limited in the implementation of Project Aruga in nine (9) 
LGUs duly endorsed by DSWD Field Offices I (Ilocos Region), II (Cagayan Valley Region), 
III (Central Luzon), IVA (CALABARZON) IVB (MIMAROPA) V (Bicol Region), Region VI 
(Western Visayas), Region XI (Davao Region) and National Capital Region.  
 
The Project shall initially be implemented in the identified LGUs, with phased expansion to 
additional regions in the succeeding years, subject to evaluation results, resource 
availability, and issuance of appropriate guidelines. 
 
These LGUs must have met the following criteria as pilot implementation site:  
 
a) High concentration of target beneficiaries as provided by the Philippine Registry of 
Persons with Disability of the DOH;  
b) Political support for the Project; and  
c) Availability of resources within the LGU.  
 
 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES 
 
a) Description:  
 
The Project Aruga is a community-based model of intervention that provides 
disability-inclusive social protection to Children with Disabilities and their families to 
address substantial unmet needs and provide comprehensive packages of social 
and health interventions realizing client-centered, family-focused and 
community-oriented approaches. The Project shall entail the provision of Disability 
Support Allowance (DSA) to the Parents and/or recognized Caregivers of Children 
with Disabilities in relation to the disability-specific support needs.  
 
 
b) Objectives:  
 
Children with Disabilities are mainstreamed in the Community with the support of 
their Parents and/ or Recognized Caregivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   8 

 
Specifically, the ST aims to:  
 
1) Enhance the detection, prevention and intervention through service provider 
linkages and networks; 
2) Provide Disability Support Allowance to augment the cost of care of Children 
diagnosed with disability; 
3) Increase access to other services such as health, education, skills 
development, livelihood, employment,  and social insurance among Children 
with Disability and their families  through strengthening local mechanisms;  
4) Capacitate immediate family members and auxiliary caregivers to deliver 
Home Care and Community Support Services; and  
5) Advocate for inclusive communities that will support the development of 
Children with Disabilities. 
 
c) Components:  
 
1. Early Detection, Prevention, and Intervention for Disability – ensures 
early detection, prevention, and intervention for disability and facilitates 
assessment-seeking behaviors and provides appropriate referral to relevant 
institutions, whether public or private, for more accurate identification of the 
needs, strengths, and challenges of Children with Disabilities across health, 
education, and assistive device provision. 
 
2. Disability Support Allowance – financial support also known as Disability 
Support Allowance (DSA) shall be provided for the Children with Disabilities 
through their family representatives to augment the extra costs of families 
with Children with Disabilities who incur high cost-of-living expenses to meet 
their basic needs, along with health, education, nutrition, and transportation 
based on the disability-related extra costs.  
 
3. Auxiliary Services – part of the case management intervention of the Local 
Social Welfare and Development Office, services will be provided to the 
Children with Disabilities and their families based on their assessed needs. 
The Project shall strengthen and harmonize the efforts of different 
government agencies towards the delivery of the following services to the 
Children with Disabilities and their families: 
 
a. Social Welfare Services – the Local Government Unit shall 
extend to the eligible Children with Disabilities and their 
families interventions that will ensure their protection, 
rehabilitation, participation and optimum development and 
these include but are not limited to: a) Assistance to 
Individuals in Crisis Situations (AICS), b) Counselling 
sessions, c) Family Strengthening activities, d) Psychosocial 
support and other relevant services. 
 
b. Health Services – necessary referrals will be facilitated to 
ensure that Children with Disabilities can access a range of 
services offered by the Local Government Unit, 
government-managed hospitals, clinics, and other relevant 
institutions and these include: a) preventive care, b) diagnostic 
care, c) rehabilitation and therapies, d) treatment, and e) 
provision of medicines related to their impairments or health 
conditions. This approach aims to provide comprehensive 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   9 

 
support, addressing the diverse health and well-being needs of 
Children with Disabilities. 
 
c. Educational Services – Children with Disabilities may also be 
referred to the programs implemented by the Department of 
Education for inclusive education through the implementation 
of the Republic Act No. 11650, otherwise known as the 
"Instituting a Policy of Inclusion and Services for Learners with 
Disability in Support of Inclusive Education Act''.  Inclusive 
education will address and respond to the diversity of needs of 
all learners by moving towards the end-goal of full 
participation, presence and achievement in learning cultures 
and communities, which involves accommodation, 
modification, adaptation, and individualization in content, 
approaches, structures, and strategies.  
 
d. Social Insurance Services – Pursuant to the Republic Act 
No. 11228 or “An Act Providing Mandatory PhilHealth 
Coverage to Persons with Disabilities", the Project ensures the 
mandatory coverage for all Children with Disabilities from 
basic care to catastrophic health package through PhilHealth;  
 
e. Skills Development and Enhancement – through 
partnership with Technical Education and Skills Development 
Authority (TESDA), Project Aruga shall facilitate the provision 
of available training programs, including community-based 
training, to caregivers and families of Children with Disabilities 
to strengthen their capacities for livelihood, self-employment, 
and productive community participation. These training 
programs shall be responsive to the needs and available 
opportunities within the community and may include technical 
assistance such as training modules, qualified trainers, 
competency assessment and certification, monitoring and 
evaluation, and, when feasible, starter tool kits to support the 
application of acquired skills. 
 
f. Livelihood/ Employment Facilitation Services – 
opportunities may be created under the Project to assist the 
family members, specifically their Parent and/ or Recognized 
Caregiver, of the Children with Disabilities in working age to be 
provided with job facilitation and/or self-employment to foster 
socio-economic participation as part of the disability-inclusive 
social protection through the Sustainable Livelihood Program 
of the DSWD or an analogous program within the Local 
Government Unit.  
 
4. Family Support Services – Capacitating Parents and/ or Recognized 
Caregivers of Children with Disabilities through peer-support sessions, family 
strengthening activities, counseling, and other relevant interventions that 
promote protection, rehabilitation, and optimum development. 
 
5. Advocacy Campaigns – Mobilizing communities and deploying Social 
Behavior Change Communication materials aimed at reducing stigma, 
promoting disability inclusion, and building supportive environments for 
Children with Disabilities. 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   10 

 
 
 
d) Target Beneficiaries:  
 
1) Primary Clients  
 
The primary clients of Project Aruga are Children with Disabilities from poor 
and vulnerable households, identified through the Registry of Persons with 
Disabilities maintained by the Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office at the 
Local Government Unit level, supplemented by relevant national databases. 
All beneficiaries are subject to validation and registration under PhilSys in 
accordance with Republic Act No. 11055 or the “Philippine Identification 
System Act”. 
 
The Parents and/or Recognized Caregivers of Children with Disabilities who 
are biological parents or guardians recognized legally or by the community to 
provide care and support to the child diagnosed with disability are also 
primary clients under the Project. 
 
2) Secondary Clients  
   
The secondary clients of Project Aruga are Local Government Units and 
Local Stakeholders in the pilot areas, service providers including social 
workers and teachers, and the general public. These groups benefit indirectly 
through strengthened local systems, improved capacity for disability-inclusive 
service delivery, and broader community awareness of the rights and needs 
of Children with Disabilities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   11 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
PROJECT APPROACHES 
 
1) Client-Centered –  the Project adopts a client-centered approach by ensuring that 
all interventions are responsive to the individual needs, rights, and aspirations of 
each child with disability. Intervention shall be aligned with individualized case 
management plans developed in coordination with the child, their parents and/or  
recognized caregivers, consistent with the principles of dignity, autonomy, and 
non-discrimination under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities and the Republic Act No. 11650. This approach also ensures that 
services are tailored according to assessed needs and the best interests of the child. 
 
2) Family-Focused –  this recognizes the family as the primary unit of care and 
socialization of the children with disabilities. It shall strengthen the capacity of 
parents and/or recognized caregivers to provide responsive and home-based and 
community support through structured case management, counseling, family 
strengthening sessions, and disability-sensitive parenting education. The provision of 
DSA shall be directed to families to reduce disability-related economic strain and 
improve caregiving conditions. This approach also aligns with ecological systems 
theory, which situates child development within interconnected family and 
environmental systems by supporting caregiving environment from the child’s 
parents and/or recognized caregivers gearing towards stability, protection, and 
long-term developmental outcomes. 
 
3) Community-Oriented – this will enable local stakeholders to strengthen 
inter-agency collaboration and institutionalize referral systems at the barangay, 
municipal, regional, and national levels. The Data Management and Referral 
Network shall harmonize information systems and promote coordinated service 
delivery among Local Government Units, health institutions, schools, and social 
protection agencies. Community volunteers shall be mobilized and capacitated as 
Auxiliary Caregivers through an Asset-based Community Development approach, 
and stigma reduction initiatives shall likewise be implemented through Social 
Behavior Change Communication strategies. 
 
4) Strengths-based – this identifies and builds upon the capacities of children with 
disabilities, their families and/ or recognized caregivers, and communities rather than 
focusing solely on deficits or their impairments. Assessment processes shall 
document protective factors, adaptive skills, social support systems, and community 
assets that can be leveraged to support participation and inclusion. Interventions, 
including livelihood facilitation and educational referrals, shall promote 
empowerment, resilience, and self-determination. This approach ensures that 
children with disabilities are recognized as rights-holders with potential and agency, 
thereby aligning social protection with inclusive development principles. 
 
5) Disability-Mainstreaming – this refers to the systemic integration of disability 
inclusion across all components of the project to ensure that children with disabilities 
and their families can access social protection and related services. This is also 
carried out through the inter-agency collaboration at the local, regional, and national 
levels, alongside the provision of DSA to help address disability-related costs for 
basic needs, health care, and education. The project also strengthens local 
mechanisms that link families to essential services. Further, parents, family 
members, and auxiliary caregivers are capacitated to provide appropriate home care 
and community-based support. 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   12 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
IMPLEMENTING PROCEDURES 
 
 
A. PRE-IMPLEMENTATION PHASE  
 
1) Ceremonial Signing of Memorandum of Agreement with Pilot Local 
Government Units  
 
1.1   The Project Focal Person from the STB shall transmit, through 
official channels, the template of the Memorandum of Agreement 
(Appendix A)  approved by the Legal Service of the DSWD 
Central Office to the DSWD Field Office;   
 
1.2  After its receipt in the DSWD Field Office, the STU/S shall be 
responsible for routing the MOA to the Legal Section/ Unit and 
pilot implementation site for further comments and inputs;  
 
1.3  The implementation site shall be given a maximum of twenty (20) 
calendar days from the receipt of the MOA to provide their 
comments and inputs, in form and substance, that shall be 
submitted to the DSWD Field Office through official channels for 
its consideration and further disposition;  
 
1.4  The minimal comments, in form and substance, shall be 
considered by the STU/S with the concurrence of the Legal Unit/ 
Section of the Field Office. However, if comments and inputs 
warrant major revisions on the provisions of the MOA, the STU/S 
shall transmit the comments and inputs to the STB for proper 
clearance by the Legal Service of the DSWD Central Office;  
 
1.5 The STB shall assess the relevance and appropriateness of the 
comments and inputs of the Field Office and/ or implementation 
site and shall be responsible for securing the clearance of the 
Legal Service, if deemed appropriate. Once cleared, the STB 
shall transmit the same to the Field Office for onward submission 
to the pilot implementation site;  
 
1.6  The MOA may be presented by the STU/S to the Sangguniang 
Panlusod/ Bayan that would assure the issuance of a local 
resolution that will Authorize the Local Chief Executive (LCE) to 
Enter into a MOA with the DSWD Field Office for the pilot 
implementation of the Project;  
 
1.7  The STU/S shall notify the STB, through the official channels, 
once the date and venue of the Ceremonial Signing of the MOA 
has been determined between the Field Office and the 
implementation site;  
 
1.8  The LCE, DSWD Field Office Director, and Cluster Head of the 
Innovations and Program Development Group shall serve as the 
primary signatories of the MOA. While the Director of the STB 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   13 

 
and Head of the Local Social Welfare and Development Office 
(LSWDO) shall serve as witnesses. They may designate 
representative/s in the event of unavailability for the Ceremonial 
MOA Signing;  
 
1.9 The Ceremonial MOA Signing shall be led by the STU/S in close 
coordination with the LSWDO and Persons with Disability Affairs 
Office (PDAO) following the Program of Activities (Annex A) as 
standardized by STB;  
 
1.10  The STU/S shall procure the needed logistical requirements, 
subject to the availability of funding, for the conduct of the 
activity. Refer to the DSWD CO or FO level Guidelines on the 
Procurement of Goods and Services under the implementing 
rules and regulations of  Republic  Act No. 12009 for further 
guidance;  
 
1.11  The pilot implementation site and DSWD Field Office may 
recommend to the STB the routing of the MOA for approval in 
lieu of a Ceremonial Signing, subject for consideration of the 
Office of the Undersecretary for Innovations and Program 
Development. The document routing must be completed by all 
parties within 20 calendar days; and  
 
1.12  The STU/S shall facilitate the notarization of the duly approved 
MOA within seven (7) working days after its Ceremonial Signing. 
The STU/S shall furnish the implementation site and the STB 
with the notarized MOA for filing for future reference.  Refer to 
the implementing rules and regulations of Republic Act No. 9470 
or the “National Archives of the Philippines  Act” or other relevant 
issuances for the filing and archival of the MOA as binding 
document.  
 
 
2) Formation of Local Project Implementers  
 
2.1 Upon the approval of the MOA, the STU/S shall coordinate with 
the LSWDO and PDAO for the organization of the Local Project 
Implementers;  
 
2.3  The Local Project Implementers shall ensure that the activities 
under the Project shall be implemented within the LGU. Its 
minimum composition shall include focal persons from the: 
LSWDO, PDAO, Local Health Office (LHO), Early Childhood 
Care and Development (ECCD), Public Employment Service 
Office (PESO), Department of Education (DepEd) - Schools 
Division Office, and etc. and may be expanded to private entities 
and Civil Society Organizations that would further the 
interventions under each activity of the Project;  
 
2.3  Each of the offices shall designate one (1) focal person or 
representative,  regardless of employment status within the LGU, 
who will be part of the Local Project Implementers. The 
concerned office will endorse the name of the assigned focal, 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   14 

 
together with employment position, e-mail address and contact 
number to the LSWDO or PDAO as its default  Secretariat;  
 
2.4 A Project Orientation among the members of the proposed Local 
Project Implementer shall be organized by the LSWDO and 
PDAO and the STU/S shall serve as Resource Person. The 
STU/S may procure the needed logistical requirements, subject 
to the availability of funding, for the conduct of the activity;  
 
2.5 The Terms of Reference (TOR) of Local Project Implementers 
(Appendix B) crafted by the STB shall be thoroughly presented 
among the proposed members of the Local Project  
Implementers. The Roles and Responsibilities as indicated in the 
TOR of each office  may be expanded by the members of the 
Local Project Implementers, as deemed necessary and 
appropriate.  
 
2.6 The LSWDO shall advocate to the LCE or Sanguniang 
Panlunsod/ Bayan, as deemed appropriate, the issuance of an 
Executive Order or Local Resolution for the constitution of the 
Local Project Implementers. The LSWDO or PDAO may conduct 
a separate Project Orientation to the LCE and/ or Sanguniang 
Panlunsod/ Bayan if the circumstances require;  
  
2.7  A copy of the local policy constituting the Local Project 
Implementers shall be forwarded by the PDAO to the STU/S for 
the reference of the DSWD Field Office; and  
 
2.8 The Local Project Implementers shall meet regularly on a 
monthly basis or as deemed necessary. The STU/S may procure 
the needed logistical requirements, subject to the availability of 
funding, for the conduct of the activity.  
 
 
 
 
3) Formation of Field Office Project Management Team  
 
3.1 The STU/S shall initiate the formation of the Project Management 
Team (PMT) at the level of the Field Office. The PMT shall be 
responsible for coordination, promotion and efficient delivery of 
services under the Project in the level of the region;  
 
3.2 The PMT  at the Field Office shall be led by the STU/S including 
its secretariat functions. The minimum members of the PMT shall 
include: STU/S, Crisis Intervention Section/ Unit, Sustainable 
Livelihood Program - Regional Program Management Office 
(RPMO), KALAHI CIDDS - RPMO, Social Marketing Unit/ 
Section, Persons with Disabilities Focal Person, Secretariat of 
the Regional Council for Disability Affairs, and etc;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   15 

 
3.3 The proposed members of the PMT must be duly endorsed by 
their respective Unit/ Section/ Office Heads regardless of 
employment status. The Head of the Units/ Sections or Office 
shall ensure that their representation to the PMT shall be 
sustained in the course of Project implementation;  
 
3.4 Upon the initial confirmation of the proposed members, the 
STU/S shall orient the PMT on their Roles and Responsibilities 
through its approved TOR (Appendix C) crafted by the STB. The 
Roles and Responsibilities as indicated in the TOR of each office  
may be expanded by the members of the PMT, as deemed 
necessary and appropriate;  
 
3.5 The PMT shall be constituted through a Special Order or 
Regional Special Order, whichever  is applicable. The Special 
Order or Regional Special Order shall be updated by the STU/S 
on an annual basis or as deemed necessary; and  
 
3.6  The PMT shall meet regularly on a monthly basis or as deemed 
necessary. The STU/S may procure the needed logistical 
requirements, subject to the availability of funding, for the 
conduct of the activity.  
 
 
4) Formation of Referral Network  
 
4.1 Upon the constitution of the Local Project Implementers, the 
STU/S shall extend assistance in the development of the Referral 
Network for the provision of Auxiliary Services for the 
beneficiaries of the Project;  
 
4.2 The Referral Network shall be formed by identifying potential 
service providers, whether public or private, that are within the 
LGU and region, with the use of the prescribed Mapping Tool 
(Annex B). Such services shall include the following: a) Social  
Services, b) Health Services, c) Educational Services, d) Social 
Insurance Services (PhilHealth Coverage); e) Skills Development 
and Enhancement, and f) Livelihood/ Employment Facilitation 
Services;  
 
4.3 The LSWDO, PDAO with the assistance of the STU/S shall 
conduct an Orientation on Project among the partners  identified 
during the mapping. The Project Briefer (Appendix D) may also 
be shared by Local Project Implementers during the Orientation 
to further the understanding on the Project outcomes, objectives 
and components;  
  
4.4  Institutional arrangements between the Local Project 
Implementers and the service providers may be crafted with the 
assistance of the STU/S. The Local Project Implementers, to be 
collectively represented by the LCE, may forge a formal 
partnership with the services providers through a Memorandum 
of Agreement/ Understanding, whichever is appropriate; and  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   16 

 
4.5 The accomplished Mapping Tool  shall be translated into the 
Directory of Partners and shall be updated by the PDAO every 
year in close coordination with the LSWDO and/ Case Manager 
assigned under Project Aruga.  
 
 
5) Mapping of Inclusive Learning Resource Centers (ILRCs), Therapy and 
Assessment Centers  
 
5.1  The STU/S in close coordination with Local Project Implementers 
shall identify ILRCs and public or private therapy centers within 
the area as service providers for professional diagnosis, 
assessment and appropriate therapies or interventions for 
children with disability;   
 
5.2  The identification shall be conducted with the use of the 
prescribed Mapping Tool developed by  STB;  
 
5.3 The STU/S with the assistance of the LSWDO or PDAO shall 
conduct an Orientation on Project among the partners  identified 
during the mapping. The Project Briefer may also be shared by 
STU during the Orientation to further the understanding on the 
Project outcomes, objectives and components;  
 
5.4  The STU/S shall highlight among the qualified private and public 
Assessment and Therapy Centers that the DSWD through its 
Crisis Intervention Program (CIP) shall initiate the signing of 
MOA for the release of  Guarantee Letters as Medical Assistance 
for the Project beneficiaries under the Assistance to Individuals in 
Crisis Situations (AICS);   
 
5.5  The STU/S shall forward, through official channels, the list of 
Assessment and Therapy Centers to STB for proper 
endorsement of the Cluster Head of the  Innovations and 
Program Development Group to the Cluster Head of Operations 
Group. The CIP and its regional counterpart, as a member of the 
PMT, shall perform all the needed undertakings to ensure the 
successful MOA signing with the identified service provider;  
 
5.6  The CIP at the Field Office shall  facilitate the notarization of 
MOA. A Certified True  Copy of which shall be furnished to the 
STU/S and the Local Project Implementers for reference and 
filing;  
 
5.7  All the parties of the MOA shall abide with all its provisions. The 
monitoring of the compliance of the partner service provider shall 
all rest with the CIP. The provision of services supported by 
Guarantee Letters shall be governed by the DSWD Guidelines on 
AICS. Refer to DSWD Memorandum Circular (M.C.) No. 20, 
series of 2025 with the Subject, “Amendment to M.C. No. 16, 
series of 2022 and M.C. No. 06, series of 2023, of the Assistance 
to Individuals in  Crisis Situations Program” for further guidance; 
and  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   17 

 
5.8  The STU/S in collaboration with the CIP may convene a meeting 
with the partner ILRC, and public or private Assessment and 
Therapy Centers for periodic review on the implementation of the 
AICS provision among Project Aruga beneficiaries. The STU/S 
may procure the needed logistical requirements, subject to the 
availability of funding, for the conduct of the activity.  
 
 
6) Profiling and Assessment of Potential Beneficiaries  
 
6.1 The STU/S in close coordination with LSWDO and PDAO shall 
commence with the house-to-house profiling and assessment of 
potential beneficiaries using the approved Profiling and 
Assessment Tool (Appendix E) after the receipt of the signed 
MOA of all parties concerned;  
 
6.2 The list of potential beneficiaries shall be derived from the master 
list of the Registry of Persons with Disabilities of PDAO and shall 
be endorsed to LSWDO to determine should the initial list 
belongs to the poor, vulnerable and disadvantaged sector of the 
LGU which will be concurred by the Barangay Council for the 
Protection of Children (BCPC);  
 
6.3  The LSWDO in coordination with the Local Statistician may also 
capitalize on their existing data should their CMBS is functional;  
6.4  Persons with disability who are beyond 18 years of age and who 
cannot fully take care of themselves due to their diagnosis  may 
still be subjected for profiling and assessment with initial 
attestation of their impairment by the BCPC;  
 
6.5  The STB in coordination with the STU/S shall provide technical 
assistance to the assigned staff from LSWDO and PDAO on the 
conduct of profiling and assessment of the potential beneficiaries; 
 
6.6 The LSWDO in coordination with STU/S, PDAO and BCPCs shall 
lead the implementation of the activity and must assign at least 
one (1) staff who will conduct profiling and assessment of 
potential beneficiaries in the pilot site of the Project;  
 
6.7 All enumerators shall submit a duly approved Non-Disclosure 
Agreement (NDA) (Appendix F) prior the conduct of the activity. 
The NDA shall be approved by the designated Data Protection 
Officer (DPO) or  Compliance Officer for Privacy (COP) where 
the enumerator is affiliated. In the absence of the DPO or COP, 
the LCE, for LGU-based enumerator, and DSWD Field Office 
Regional Director, for DSWD Field Office staff, may approve the 
NDA. The STU/S shall keep the duly approved NDAs for filing 
and future reference;  
 
6.8  The target beneficiaries shall be requested to accomplish the 
following prior to the interview: a) Consent Form (Annex C), b) 
Separate Media Release (Annex D), and c) Additional 
Safeguarding Policy (Annex E). The enumerator shall diligently 
explain the importance of each of the forms to the respondent. 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   18 

 
The Consent Form shall be collected by the enumerator. While 
the respondent shall be provided with one (1) copy of all the 
forms accomplished;  
 
6.9  The profiling and assessment will not proceed should the 
respondent refuses to provide Consent;  
6.10 All of the targeted potential beneficiaries shall undergo an 
one-on-one interview with the assigned staff from STU/S, 
LSWDO and PDAO;  
 
6.11  A respondent shall only be limited to the parent and/or 
recognized caregiver of the child diagnosed with disability. In 
cases that both are absent in the time of the interview, the PDAO 
in coordination with the BCPC shall schedule the most favorable 
date of interview; and  
 
6.12   
 
 
 
6.13  
All of the profiled potential beneficiaries assessed to be Severe 
and Moderate shall be subjected for deliberation leading to the 
prioritization in the final list of potential beneficiaries; and  
 
Those profiled potential beneficiaries who were assessed to be 
Low and not included in the final list can be assisted under the 
project through referrals as needed. 
 
 
7) Deliberations of Potential Beneficiaries  
 
7.1 The STU/S in coordination with the Local Project Implementers, 
shall immediately set a schedule for the deliberations of the 
profiled and initially assessed potential beneficiaries;  
 
7.2 The STU/S shall facilitate the activity and document the 
deliberation through Minutes of Deliberations. While, the LSWDO 
and PDAO shall be responsible for the preparation of the 
presentation of the potential beneficiaries for deliberations;  
 
7.3 The deliberation shall be participated in by the representative/s 
from the STB, STU/S, and Local Project Implementers involved 
in the profiling and implementation of the Project;  
 
7.4 All of the profiled potential beneficiaries with Severe assessment 
results shall undergo deliberation and will be ranked based their 
circumstances noted during the house-to-house profiling and 
assessment;  
 
7.5  Should the final list did not reach the total number of target 
beneficiaries for the current year, the children with disabilities 
assessed and categorized as Moderate may be considered. 
While, the children with disabilities assessed and classified as 
Low may be referred to Auxiliary Services under the Project, as 
deemed necessary, for possible interventions and shall be 
maintained in the waitlist for future reference of the DSWD Field 
Office and Local Project Implementers. 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   19 

 
7.6 The final list of eligible beneficiaries shall be certified using the 
prescribed template for the Certification of Eligible Beneficiaries 
(Annex F) to be signed and endorsed through official channels by 
the LSWDO and PDAO to the DSWD Field Office;  
 
7.7  The endorsement of Persons with Disability, who are beyond 18 
years of age, profiled and assessed and is included in the final 
list of beneficiaries, shall be supported with a Medical 
Certification from the Local Health Office (LHO);  
 
7.8  Upon the receipt of the Certification of Eligible Beneficiaries, the 
STUs shall immediately notify the LGU  through official channels 
of their inclusion to the Project. Notifying the final beneficiaries 
shall rest with the PDAO and BCPC to any of their preferred 
channels of communication; and  
 
7.9  In circumstances of demise of any of the endorsed or enrolled 
beneficiaries, the ranked potential beneficiaries, as waitlisted, 
from the deliberations shall be considered for formal 
endorsement by the LGU.  
 
 
8) Enrollment of Eligible Beneficiaries to Project Aruga Support 
Management System 
 
8.1 Upon the receipt of the acknowledgement of the  Field Office on 
the final list of the Project Aruga beneficiaries, the STU/S shall 
commence within three (3) working days their enrollment to the 
Project Aruga Support Management System;  
 
8.2  The Project Aruga Support Management System shall only be 
limited to the following Field Office personnels: a) Innovations 
Division Chief, b) STU/S Head, and c) STU/S technical staff. 
 
8.3 The STU/S shall  be responsible for the submission of an NDA 
(Appendix G) and corporate DSWD Google Suite Account of its 
users to the STB as a requirement for the issuance of their user 
credentials. The NDA shall be duly approved by the DSWD 
Regional Director or Field Offices DPO/ COP;  
 
8.4  In circumstances of staff movement or separation from the Field 
Office, the STU/S shall be responsible in notifying the STB on the 
matter. New user credentials shall then be issued for the newly 
onboarded personnel upon the submission of the needed 
documentary requirements;  
 
8.5  The access of users in the Field Office shall only be limited to the 
data entries and modification under Module 1 of the Project 
Aruga Support Management System. Refer to the User’s Manual 
of the Project Aruga Support Management System for further 
guidance;  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   20 

 
8.6  Successful enrollment of the clients to the Information System 
shall warrant the issuance of a Unique Identification Number and 
Quick Response (QR) Code;  
 
8.7  For beneficiaries from the waitlist and was newly certified to be 
eligible to the Project shall be immediately enrolled to the 
Information System (IS) either by the STU/S Head or technical 
staff upon the receipt of the formal endorsement from the LGU; 
and  
 
8.8  The STU/S shall maintain and secure the beneficiary records in 
the Information System in accordance with existing 
confidentiality, records management, and data privacy policies 
and procedures. Refer to the implementing rules and regulations 
of Republic Act No. 10173 or the “Data Privacy Act of 2012” for 
further guidance.  
 
 
9) Mobilization of Auxiliary Caregivers  
 
 
9.1 The LSWDO, PDAO, and LHO with the assistance of the STU/S 
shall commence with the mobilization of Auxiliary Caregivers in 
barangays within three (3) days after the receipt of formal notice 
from the DSWD Field Office on the inclusion of the endorsed 
clients to the Project;  
 
9.2  The mobilization of prospective Auxiliary Caregivers may be 
conducted through the BCPCs, Barangay Health Workers (BHW) 
and Child Development Workers as conduits;  
 
9.3  The prospective Auxiliary Caregivers must  express volunteerism 
to become part of the Project implementation and possess the 
basic knowledge and skills in caring for children. Their 
expression should be supported by the barangay captain through 
the issuance of Barangay Clearance highlighting that the 
prospective Auxiliary Caregiver is deemed to be of good moral 
character. Such document shall be submitted to the PDAO for 
filing;  
 
9.4   The Local Project Implementers may conduct screening of the 
volunteers if deemed necessary;  
 
9.5 The LSWDO, PDAO with the assistance of the STU/S shall 
conduct an Orientation on Project among the prospective 
Auxiliary Caregivers. The Project Briefer may also be shared by 
Local Project Implementers during the Orientation to further the 
understanding of the Project outcomes, objectives and 
components. Its  must also highlighted during the Orientation the 
ratio of Home Care Support Services that is one (1) Auxiliary 
Caregiver to ten (10) children with disability;  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   21 

 
9.6  A Contract of Commitment (COC) (Annex G) shall be forged by 
the prospective Auxiliary Caregivers after the Project Orientation. 
Such document shall also be submitted to the PDAO for filling;  
 
9.7 The prospective Auxiliary Caregivers who have submitted: a) 
Barangay Clearance, and b) COC, and has successfully 
completed the Project Orientation shall be endorsed by the 
LSWDO to the DSWD Field Office through formal channels using 
the prescribed template (Annex H) by the STB; and  
 
9.8  In circumstances of demise of any of the endorsed Auxiliary 
Caregivers, the LSWDO, PDAO, and LHO may recruit new 
volunteers and shall undergo the same process as specified.  
 
 
10) Capacity Building of Auxiliary Caregivers  
 
 
10.1  The STU/S shall coordinate with the Local Project Implementers 
on the  dates of the Rollout Training of the endorsed Auxiliary 
Caregivers. The STU/S, LSWDO and PDAO shall be  acting as 
the Learning Management Team (LMT) for the activity;   
 
10.2  The STU/S shall lead in the Rollout Training while the members 
of Local Project Implementers and other professionals within the 
region may be tapped as Resource Persons (RPs) during the 
conduct of the activity. The RP’s services may be compensated 
subject to the availability of funding and as applicable. Please 
refer to  DSWD Administrative Order No. 04, series of 2022 with 
the Subject, “Amendment to Administrative Order No. 10, series 
of 2019 or the Guidelines on the Grant of Honoraria to Lecturers, 
Resource Persons, Coordinators, and Facilitators in Seminars, 
Training Programs, and other Similar Activities” for further 
guidance;   
 
10.3  The RPs may also be furnished in advance a copy of the 
Empowered and  Resilient Caregiving Training Manual (Appendix 
H) and Training Kit for the Trainers (Appendix I) as reference in 
the conduct of the sessions;  
 
10.4  The conduct of the activity should be in a accordance to the 
approved Instructional  Design on the conduct of Training on 
Empowered and Resilient Caregiving (Appendix J) to be made 
available  by the STB among the Field Offices for  reference;  
 
10.5  The STU/S shall be responsible in recording  the entire activity 
through narrative and photo documentations which will be 
submitted both to the Office of the Regional Director and STB 
within 20 calendar days after the activity;  
 
10.6  The Auxiliary Caregivers shall be issued with a Certificate of 
Completion to be signed by the DSWD Field Office Director at the 
end of the capacity building;  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   22 

 
10.7  The LMT shall provide the Auxiliary Caregivers who completed 
the training with Memorandum of Undertaking (Annex I)  (MOU) 
to be concurred by the Heads of LSWDO and PDAO. The MOU 
shall reaffirm their commitment to the Project and shall be kept 
for filing by the PDAO;  
 
10.8  The LSWDO and PDAO may organize other relevant capacity 
building activities that aim to further the knowledge and skill sets 
of the Auxiliary Caregivers. Such activity shall be implemented in 
close collaboration with the members of the Local Project 
Implementers that may also serve as RPs;   
 
10.9 The STU/S and PDAO shall maintain the list of trained Auxiliary 
Caregivers for the reference of the  DSWD Field Office and LGU, 
respectively; and  
 
10.10  The STU/S shall procure the needed logistical requirements, 
subject to the availability of funding, for the conduct of the 
activity. 
 
 
11) Capacity Building on the Use of Gabay-Magulang Session Guide for 
Implementers 
 
11.1 The STU/S shall coordinate with the Local Project Implementers 
on the  dates of the capacity building on the use of the 
Gabay-Magulang Session Guide for Implementers. The STU/S, 
LSWDO and PDAO shall be  acting as the LMT for the activity;   
 
11.2 The target participants of the training would not be limited to the 
members of the Local Project Implementers hence it may also be 
open to Social Workers of the LSWDO and CSO partners 
engaged in the implementation of the Project in the LGU level;  
 
11.3 The STU/S shall lead in the capacity building activity while 
technical staff from the STB and other professionals within the 
region may be tapped as Resource Persons (RPs) during the 
conduct of the activity. The RP’s services may be compensated 
subject to the availability of funding and as applicable;  
 
11.4 The RPs may also be furnished in advance a copy of the 
Gabay-Magulang Session Guide for Implementers (Appendix K) 
and Trainer’s Lecture Kit on Gabay-Magulang Sessions 
(Appendix L) as reference in the conduct of the sessions;  
 
11.5 The STU/S shall be responsible in recording  the entire activity 
through narrative and photo documentations which will be 
submitted both to the Office of the Regional Director and STB 
within 20 calendar days after the activity;  
 
11.6  A Certificate of Completion to be signed by the DSWD Field 
Office Director at the end of the capacity building shall be 
provided among the  training completers;  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   23 

 
10.7  The LMT shall provide the training completers with MOU (Annex 
J)  to be concurred by the Heads of LSWDO and PDAO. The 
MOU shall reaffirm their commitment to the Project and shall be 
kept for filing by the PDAO;  
 
11.8 The STU/S, LSWDO and PDAO shall maintain the list of trained 
facilitators of Gabay-Magulang Sessions for the reference of the  
DSWD Field Office and LGU, respectively; and  
 
11.9  The STU/S shall procure the needed logistical requirements, 
subject to the availability of funding, for the conduct of the 
activity. 
 
 
12) Project Orientation with Beneficiaries  
 
12.1 The STU/S, in coordination with Local Project Implementers, 
shall organize and schedule the Orientation of Project 
beneficiaries in a conducive and accessible venue. The 
participation of both parents of the children with beneficiaries is 
ideal but not required;  
 
12.2 The Local Project Implementers shall assist in mobilizing the 
Project beneficiaries and ensure the dissemination of notices and 
other necessary information related to the activity;  
 
12.3 The STU/S shall conduct the Orientation on the Project using the 
Slides (Appendix M) standardized by the STB. The Project 
Briefer may also be shared by Local Project Implementers during 
the Orientation to further the understanding of the Project 
outcomes, objectives and components. 
 
12.4 The STU/S shall highlight during the Orientation that the 
Disability Support Allowance (DSA) aims to augment the cost of 
care of the children beneficiaries enrolled under the Project. A  
Commitment Contract highlighting the same shall be forged by 
the parent and/ or  recognized caregiver and shall be collected by 
the STU/S for filing;  
 
12.5 The STU/S shall be responsible in recording  the entire activity 
through narrative and photo documentations which will be 
submitted both to the Office of the Regional Director and STB 
within 20 calendar days after the activity; and  
 
12.6  The STU/S shall procure the needed logistical requirements, 
subject to the availability of funding, for the conduct of the 
activity. 
 
 
13. Hiring of Staff Complement for the DSWD Field Offices  
 
13.1  The STB shall allocate funding support for the Hiring of nine (9) 
Social Welfare Officer (SWO) II (SG 15) under Contract of 
Service (COS) and will be stationed in the STU/S of the DSWD 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   24 

 
Field Offices I, II, III, IVA, MIMAROPA, V, VI, XI and National  
Capital Region;  
 
13.2  The STB shall be responsible in crafting the following technical 
documents in the creation of the said positions: a) 
Competency-Job Description (Appendix N), b) Request for the 
Creation of Positions to be approved by the Cluster Head of the 
Innovations and Program Development Group, and c) Current 
Staffing of the STB and concerned STU/S;  
 
13.3  The STB shall officially transmit all the aforementioned approved 
documents to the concerned DSWD Field Offices to facilitate the 
hiring process; and  
 
13.4  The hired SWO II shall carry out all the specified terms of the 
position and the COS may be renewed subject to the availability 
of funding of the STB for each Fiscal Year.  
 
 
B. IMPLEMENTATION PHASE  
 
1) Social Case Management of Project Aruga Beneficiary  
 
1.1 The children with disabilities assessed to be eligible for the 
Project shall undergo social case management by the LSWDO 
through the designated case manager by the LGU. The case 
load ratio is one (1) social worker to 15 Project Aruga 
beneficiaries;  
 
1.2  
 
The process of Assessment, Treatment Planning, Intervention 
Monitoring and Termination of the case shall be undertaken by 
the case manager with the client and his/ her parent and/ or 
recognized caregiver;  
 
1.3 During the process of intake the case manager shall provide a 
detailed explanation of the client's entry into the social case 
management within the Project. Forms such as Client’s Informed 
Consent (Annex K) and Data Privacy Consent (Annex L)  to be 
signed any of the child’s parents and/ or recognized caregiver 
shall also be accomplished during the process of intake;  
 
1.4  Whole  body picture shall be taken by the case manager during 
the process of intake;  
  
1.5 The minimum referrals shall include the provision of Auxiliary 
Services such as:  a) Social Welfare Services, b) Health 
Services, c) Educational Services, d) Social Insurance Services 
and e) Skills Development and/ or Enhancement, based on the 
child’s assessed needs;  
 
1.6 The Social Case Study Report shall be updated by the case 
manager every semester and shall be kept together with the: a) 
child’s photo;  b) Informed Consent; c) Data Privacy Consent; d) 
Medical/ Assessment Records, e) Treatment/ Rehabilitation 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   25 

 
Plans, and d)  Progress Notes accomplished by the case worker 
and Auxiliary Caregivers, in an individual case folder pursuant to 
the case management standards set forth by the Standards 
Bureau;  
 
1.7 The STU/S shall diligently monitor the progress of each Project 
beneficiary on a quarterly basis. All progress shall be duly 
reflected in the beneficiary’s profile in the Project Aruga Support 
Management System;  
  
1.8 The case manager shall administer the Disability Needs 
Assessment System (DNAS) six months after the intake process. 
The DNAS shall be readministered once a year to determine the 
progress of the Project beneficiaries in the gamut of social case 
management. Results of the annual administration of the DNAS 
shall be the basis of the case manager to recommend to the 
members of the Local Project Implementers and DSWD Field 
Office the exit of the beneficiary from the Project. Refer to the 
User’s Manual on the administration of DNAS for further 
guidance;  
  
1.9 The exit from the Project shall be planned with the beneficiary, 
case manager and DSWD Field Office personnel three (3) 
months prior to the case termination; hence, this will  warrant the 
delistment of the client to the active  payroll generated from the 
Project Aruga Support Management System;  
 
1.10  
 
Reentry to the Project akin to the re-entry of social case 
management shall be possible in  cases that the client garners 
an unstable level of functioning as a result of the DNAS 
administration after the beneficiaries’ exit. However, the client 
shall be waitlisted and the timeline of  reentry shall depend on the 
prioritization list of Profiled and Assessed clients and the 
acknowledgement of the Field Office on the Endorsement of 
Eligible Project Aruga beneficiaries;  
 
1.11  
 
In cases that the Project beneficiary is an active beneficiary of 
the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, Sustainable Livelihood 
Program (SLP) or Walang Gutom Program (WGP), the case 
management of the child diagnosed with disability shall rest with 
the LSWDO while the family members shall be under the 
supervision of the Municipal/ City Link, SLP or WGP 
Coordinators, as deemed applicable;   
 
1.12  
 
Case conferences shall be organized by the LSWDO and shall 
be properly documented by the case manager and shall be 
maintained in the beneficiary’s case folder. Case supervisions 
shall likewise be conducted to safeguard clients, ensure ethical 
practice, and maintain professional standards on social work 
practice; and  
 
1.13  
 
Sessions for Caring for Carers may be organized by the LSWDO 
and other members of the Local Project Implementers on a 
regular basis. The STU/S shall procure the needed logistical 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   26 

 
requirements, subject to the availability of funding, for the 
conduct of the activity. 
 
 
2) Development Assessment, Rehabilitation and Empowerment of 
Children with Disabilities (DARE CAREvan)  
 
2.1 The STB, in partnership with the National Council on Disability 
Affairs (NCDA) and the Secretariat of the Regional Council on 
Disability Affairs (RCDA), shall lead in the implementation of 
DARE CAREVan in the pilot areas to ensure Early Detection, 
Prevention and Intervention to Disability (EDPID) among Project 
beneficiaries. Refer to the NCDA issuances on the conduct of 
DARE CAREvan for further reference.  
 
2.2 The STB and NCDA shall meet at least 30 days prior the conduct 
of each DARE CAREvan to ensure that all the needed 
preparations are undertaken;  
 
2.3 The NCDA and RCDA shall be responsible in tapping 
professionals such as: 1) medical doctors with diverse 
specialization, and 2) therapies, that will provide services that are 
free of charge during the agreed timeline of implementation of the 
DARE CAREvan;  
 
2.4  The STU/S shall coordinate with the pilot areas on the schedules 
and its counterpart limited to the logistical requirements and 
assisting staff during the actual conduct of the activity;  
 
2.5  The PDAO, BCPCs and BHWs of the LGU shall be responsible 
in disseminating the conduct of the DARE CAREvan to Project 
beneficiaries to any communication channels;  
 
2.6  All relevant documents as to the diagnosis, evaluation, 
assessment/s and intervention plans issued by the DARE 
CAREvan shall be furnished to the designated case manager of 
the Project beneficiary for the continuum of care; and  
 
2.7  The STU/S shall be responsible in recording  the entire activity 
through narrative and photo documentations which will be 
submitted both to the Office of the Regional Director, NCDA, 
RCDA members and STB within 20 calendar days after the 
activity.  
 
 
3) Provision of Disability Support Allowance  
 
 
3.1  The STU/S in coordination with the Local Project Implementers, 
through the LSWDO and PDAO, shall organize the monthly or 
quarterly  distribution of Disability Support Allowance (DSA) 
among the Project beneficiaries on the agreed date and venue 
for the activity;  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   27 

 
3.2  The PDAO with the assistance of the Auxiliary Caregivers  shall 
be responsible in disseminating the schedule of the DSA 
distribution among all the Project beneficiaries;  
 
3.3   A flat rate of Two Thousand Pesos (PHP 2,000.00) for each 
month shall be provided to each child with disability to augment 
on their cost of care;  
 
3.4   The STU/S shall generate the payroll from the Project Aruga 
Support Management System with the assistance of STB 
designated IS administrator 15 days prior to the distribution of the 
DSA. Only the payroll generated from the IS shall be used by the 
STU/S in the scheduled DSA distribution;  
 
3.5  Only the registered claimant, either any of the parents and/or 
recognized caregiver of the child with disability, in the IS shall be 
authorized to receive the DSA. In cases of demise of the 
claimant, the STU/S may amend the entries on the child’s profile 
at the IS subject to the approval of the Innovations Division Chief 
of the Field Office. A special payroll may be generated with the 
assistance of the STB designated IS administrator;  
 
3.6  A photocopy of one (1) government issued and valid 
Identification (ID) card with three (3) wet signatures of the 
claimant shall be the attachment to the payroll. In cases that the 
claimant has inability to write,  a thumbmark shall be considered. 
The wet signature and thumbmark biometrics should be made by 
the claimant in front of the Special Disbursement Officer (SDO) or 
Paymaster;  
 
3.7 An MOU (Annex M) highlighting that the DSA’s intent on 
augmenting the cost of care of the Project beneficiaries shall be 
signed by the claimant on the first scheduled payout and shall be 
kept by the case manager for filing in the individual case folders;  
 
3.8   In circumstances that the claimant has no available valid ID card 
in time of the distribution of the DSA due to force majeure, a 
Barangay Clearance, issued within the current month, supported 
with an updated Case Summary Report by the LSWDO may be 
considered;  
 
3.9 The STU/S must also update the beneficiary's profile in the 
Project Aruga Support Management System prior to the release 
of the DSA. In cases of intermittent internet connectivity, the 
updating of the profile may be conducted by the STU/S within 
seven (7) working days after the payout;  
 
3.10  The Project beneficiaries possessing multiple disabilities shall 
only be entitled to one (1) DSA for each month;  
 
3.11   The STU/S shall organize a special payout within seven (7) 
working days after the recent release of the DSA to 
accommodate unclaimed DSAs and special payrolls. Unclaimed 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   28 

 
DSAs after this period shall be returned to the Field Office and 
shall be  declared as savings of the STU/S;  
 
3.12  
 
The SDO shall immediately liquidate the cash advances made for 
the DSA not later than three (3) working days from the payout/s 
to ensure effective and efficient fiscal management. Refer to 
DSWD Administrative Order No. 13, series of 2021 with the 
Subject, “Guidelines on the Rules and Regulations in Granting, 
Utilizing and Liquidation of all Cash Advances and Penalties for 
Failure to Liquidate within the Prescribed Reglemantary Periods” 
for further guidance; and  
 
3.13  The STU/S shall be responsible in recording  the entire activity 
through narrative and photo documentations which will be 
submitted both to the Office of the Regional Director and STB 
within 20 calendar days after the activity.  
 
 
4) Assessment/ Evaluation of Project Aruga beneficiaries to Public or 
Private  Centers  
 
4.1 The STU/S shall furnish the list of accredited centers to the 
LSWDO and shall form part of the Referral Network. The list 
must be updated by the STU/S in coordination with the CIP or its 
regional counterpart in an annual basis;  
 
4.2 The  assigned case manager shall refer the Project beneficiaries 
to any of the public or private centers partnered by the CIP or its 
regional counterpart should he or she did not benefit from any of 
the DARE CAREvan conducted or at any point along the case 
management should he/ she needs further assessment or 
evaluation;  
 
4.3  The referral should be coursed through by the case manager to 
the DSWD Field Office  with an accompanying: a) medical 
clearance with initial diagnosis with recommendation/s by the 
LHO, and b) quotation from the accredited service provider. The 
CIP or its regional counterpart shall then issue a Guarantee 
Letter (GL) for the services needed that will be provided within 
three (3) working days after its receipt. The STU/S shall monitor 
its release within the said time duration;  
 
4.4  The release of GL/s for the purpose of the reevaluation or 
reassessment shall be governed by the existing guidelines of the 
DSWD on AICS. Refer to DSWD M.C. No. 20, series of 2025 
with the Subject, “Amendment to M.C. No. 16, series of 2022 and 
M.C. No. 06, series of 2023, of the AICS” for further guidance 
 
4.5  The case manager may accompany the Project beneficiary in 
during the evaluation or assessment if needed;  
 
4.6  The parent and/ or recognized caregiver shall furnish the case 
manager with the results of the evaluation/ assessment to the 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   29 

 
case manager as the basis of the intervention plan during the 
social case management process. All relevant documents issued 
by the public or private  centers shall be kept by the case 
manager in the individual case folders of the Project 
beneficiaries; and  
 
4.7  The case manager shall initiate case conferences with the Local 
Project Implementers for a more responsive provision of 
interventions, if deemed appropriate.  
 
 
5) Referral to Therapy Centers  
 
 
5.1  The STU/S shall furnish the list of accredited therapy centers 
offering behavioral, occupational, physical and speech therapies 
to the LSWDO and shall form part of the Referral Network. The 
list must be updated by the STU/S in coordination with the CIP or 
its regional counterpart in an annual basis;  
 
5.2 The  assigned case manager shall refer the Project beneficiaries 
to any of the therapy centers partnered by the CIP or its regional 
counterpart should he or she did not benefit from any of the 
DARE CAREvan conducted or its required follow through actions 
and or at any point along the case management process;  
 
5.3  The referral should be coursed through by the case manager to 
the DSWD Field Office  with an accompanying: a) Medical 
Certificate with diagnosis issued during the DARE CAREvan, and 
b) quotation from the accredited service provider/s. The CIP or its 
regional counterpart shall then issue a GL for the services 
needed that will be provided within three (3) working days after 
its receipt. The STU/S shall monitor its release within the said 
time duration;  
 
5.4  The release of GL/s for the purpose of the continued therapy 
sessions shall be governed by the existing guidelines of the 
DSWD on AICS. Refer to DSWD M.C. No. 20, series of 2025 
with the Subject, “Amendment to M.C. No. 16, series of 2022 and 
M.C. No. 06, series of 2023, of the AICS” for further guidance.  
 
5.5  Referral to multiple service provider for specific therapy needed 
by the Project beneficiaries may be made by the case manager 
subject to the approval of the social worker of the CIP or its 
regional counterpart;  
 
5.6  Referrals to LGU managed therapy centers is paramount to 
maximize local resources and address accessibility issues 
among Project beneficiaries;  
 
5.7  All relevant documents issued by the public or private  therapy 
centers shall be kept by the case manager in the individual case 
folders of the Project beneficiaries; and  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   30 

 
5.8  The case manager shall initiate case conferences with the Local 
Project Implementers for a more responsive provision of 
interventions, if deemed appropriate.  
 
 
6) Referral to Inclusive Learning Resource Centers  
 
 6.1  The case manager shall initiate the referral of the Project 
beneficiary to the  Inclusive Learning Resource Center (ILRC), 
based on the assessed needs and the availability of the facility 
within the LGU;  
 
 6.2  The ILRC may provide any of the following services to Project 
beneficiaries, based on their assessed needs: a) Core 
Educational Services, b) Allied Medical and Therapeutic 
Services, c) Capacity Building and Support, d) Community and 
Transition  Services, and e) Physical Infrastructure. Refer to the 
implementing rules and regulations of Republic Act No. 11650 or 
“Instituting a Policy of Inclusion and Services for Learners with 
Disabilities in Support of Inclusive Education Act" for further 
guidance;  
 
 6.3  Individual interventions must be ensured to tailor fit to the needs 
of the child. Such interventions must be discussed by the case 
manager and ILRC personnel during case conferences once the 
child is admitted within the facility;  
 
 6.4   The personnel from the Department of Education - Schools 
Division Office (DepEd-SDO), as a member of the Local Project 
Implementers, shall be responsible in monitoring the Project 
beneficiary enrolled in the facility in close coordination with the 
ILRC personnel. The DepEd-SDO shall furnish the case manager 
with individual reports with progress notes of each enrolled 
Project beneficiary in a quarterly basis;  
 
6.5  All relevant documents issued by the ILRC shall be kept by the 
case manager in the individual case folders of the Project 
beneficiaries; and  
 
6.6  The case manager shall initiate case conferences with the ILRC 
personnel/s with the DepEd-SDO for a more responsive provision 
of interventions, if deemed appropriate.  
 
 
7) Referral for Skills Enhancement and/ or Development under Technical 
Education Skills Development Authority (TESDA)  
 
 7.1  The case manager shall initiate the referral of the Project 
beneficiaries above 15 years of age to TESDA or TESDA 
accredited facility for skills enhancement or development, based 
on their assessed needs;  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   31 

 
 7.2  The services may be accessed from TESDA or TESDA 
accredited facility are vocational training and National 
Certification (NC) for Persons with Disability;  
 
 7.3  The case manager shall assist the parents and/ or recognized 
caregivers in preparation of the needed documentary 
requirements for the TESDA training application and scholarship, 
as deemed applicable;  
 
7.4 All relevant documents issued by the TESDA shall be kept by the 
case manager in the individual case folders of the Project 
beneficiaries; and  
 
7.5 The case manager shall initiate case conferences with the 
TESDA or TESDA accredited facility personnel/s for a more 
responsive provision of interventions, if deemed appropriate.  
 
 
8) Home Care Support Services 
 
 
8.1  The PDAO in coordination with the LHO shall be responsible for 
the deployment of Auxiliary Caregivers among Project 
beneficiaries within communities. The ideal case load ratio is one 
(1) Auxiliary Caregiver to ten (10) Project Aruga beneficiaries;  
 
8.2  The  Auxiliary Caregivers shall be responsible in assisting the 
parents and/ or recognized caregivers of Project Aruga 
beneficiaries on: a) Personal Care, and b) Health Management, 
to ease their caregiving fatigue that they encounter;  
 
8.3  The  Auxiliary Caregivers shall be provided with kits (Appendix 
O) by the DSWD Field Office, subject to the availability of funds, 
to establish their identity as ancillary workforce under the Project;  
 
8.4  The Auxiliary Caregivers must conduct 12 full days of Home Care 
Support Services for every month to cover all their assigned 
Project beneficiary. This must be announced among Project 
beneficiaries with  the assistance of the BHW, Child  
Development Worker and BCPC to ensure the presence of any of 
the parents/ recognized caregiver or adult member of the 
household during the home visitation;  
 
8.5  The Auxiliary Caregiver shall record  his/ her observations on the  
Project Beneficiary during the home visit through the Progress 
Notes template (Annex N) supported by a Certificate of 
Appearance (Annex O), prescribed by STB;   
 
8.6  The accomplished Progress Notes shall be submitted for 
approval by the Auxiliary Caregivers to the PDAO at the end  of 
the month. It shall then be forwarded to the designated case 
manager for filing in the individual case folder of the Project 
Aruga beneficiary;  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   32 

 
8.7 The PDAO shall certify the Services Rendered of all the Auxiliary 
Caregivers for every month using the template (Annex P), 
prescribed by the STB, as  basis in the release of their monthly 
honoraria. The Certification shall be endorsed to the STU/S 
within three (3) working days at the end each month;  
 
8.8 The honoraria to be provided to Auxiliary Caregivers shall be 
based on the approved regional wage order of the National 
Wages and Productivity Commission (NWPC). Refer to latest 
NWPC latest Wage Order per Region for further guidance;  
 
8.9  The STU/S in coordination with the PDAO shall organize the 
payout of Auxiliary Caregivers either on a monthly or quarterly 
basis. The STU/S shall prepare the payroll (Annex Q), using the 
template prescribed by the STB,  and the Certification of Services 
Rendered endorsed by the PDAO;  
 
8.10 A photocopy of one (1) government issued and valid 
Identification (ID) card with three (3) wet signatures of the 
Auxiliary Caregivers shall be the attachment to the payroll. The 
wet signature should be made by the claimant in front of the SDO 
or Paymaster;  
 
8.11  In circumstances that the Auxiliary Caregiver has no available 
valid ID card in time of the payout of the honorarium due to force 
majeure, a Barangay Clearance issued within the current month 
may be considered;  
 
8.12   The STU/S shall organize a special payout within seven (7) 
working days for unclaimed honorariums. Unclaimed 
honorariums after this period shall be returned to the Field Office 
and shall be  declared as savings of the STU/S;  
 
8.13  
 
The SDO shall immediately liquidate the cash advances made for 
the honorariums not later than three (3) working days from the 
payout/s to ensure effective and efficient fiscal management. 
Refer to DSWD Administrative Order No. 13, series of 2021 with 
the Subject, “Guidelines on the Rules and Regulations in 
Granting, Utilizing and Liquidation of all Cash Advances and 
Penalties for Failure to Liquidate within the Prescribed 
Reglemantary Periods” for further guidance; and  
 
8.14   The STU/S shall be responsible in recording  the entire activity 
through narrative and photo documentations which will be 
submitted both to the Office of the Regional Director and STB 
within 20 calendar days after the activity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   33 

 
9) Deployment Social Behavior Change and Communication Materials 
 
9.1  
 
 
 
 
 
Social Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) materials 
including, but not limited to: a) tote bags, b) t-shirts, c) calendars, 
c) tumbler, d) stickers, and etc., bearing unified messaging on a 
“Barrier-Free Community for Persons with Disability” intended per 
target audience will be disseminated among households within 
the LGU;  
 
9.2  Advocacy messages made by the STB and was approved by the 
Digital Marketing Service may also be disseminated through the 
official social media platforms of the LGU and members of the 
Local Project Implementers;  
 
9.3  Funding for the reproduction of the SBCC materials will be 
provided by the DSWD with augmentation support from the LGU 
through its L/BCPC, LSWDO and PDAO;  
 
9.4 Culmination of the advocacy campaigns shall be led by the Local 
Project Implementers in coordination with the BCPCs and other 
local partners during the celebration of the National Disability 
Prevention and Rehabilitation Week and International Day of 
Persons with Disabilities in the Philippines every third week of 
July and 03 December of every year, respectively; and 
 
 
9.5   The PDAO with the assistance of the BCPCs shall maintain the 
list of distributed SBCC materials for the inventory of target 
audience reached.  
 
 
10) Conduct of Gabay-Magulang Sessions  
 
10.1  The parents and/ or recognized caregivers of the Project 
beneficiaries will be mandated by the LSWDO to attend the 
Gabay-Magulang sessions twice a month within the agreed 
schedule. The BCPC shall take charge on identifying the most 
conducive venue within the barangay for the conduct of every 
session;  
 
10.2  The BCPC shall take charge on identifying the most conducive 
venue within the barangay for the conduct of every session;  
 
10.3  The trained members of the Local Project Implementers and staff 
from the LSWDO and PDAO on Gabay-Magulang Session Guide 
for Implementers shall be the facilitator of the sessions on a 
rotation basis. Refer to the Gabay-Magulang Session Guide for 
Implementers for further guidance;  
 
10.4   Ideal ratio in the conduct of each session will be one (1) facilitator 
with 15 parents and/ or recognized caregivers. The participation 
of both parents is encouraged but not required. However, 
sessions may be conducted with a maximum of 25 participants 
per session. Exceeding the said number shall warrant the 
organization of a separate session group/s;  
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   34 

 
 
10.5  In the event that there is a low turn-out of parents and/ or 
recognized caregivers in the progression of the sessions, they 
may be referred to session groups in other barangays. The 
LSWDO in collaboration with the PDAO may opt to conduct a 
special session at the LSWDO to meet the minimum target 
participants for the sessions;  
 
10.6  Check-in and check-out activities shall be led by the facilitator for 
each session to  build rapport among the participants and 
establish a safe space for  learning;  
 
10.7   The facilitator shall monitor the attendance of the parents and/ or 
recognized caregivers to each session. The BCPC and Auxiliary 
Caregivers  may be tapped by the facilitator to conduct home 
visitations to reimpose the parent’s participation. Catch up 
sessions may be conducted in groups or one-on-one basis for 
the parents who missed any of the sessions;  
 
10.8  The LGU, through the available funding of the LSWDO, PDAO or 
L/BCPC, may incentivise the participation of the parents and/ or 
recognized caregivers to the Gabay-Magulang sessions to 
address attrition;  and  
 
10.9  Disclosures of distress during the conduct of the sessions and 
needing psychological first aid shall be referred to any trained 
personnel within the LSWDO.  
 
 
11) Referral to Existing DSWD Programs of Parents and/or Recognized 
Caregivers  
 
11.1  The designated case manager will provide interventions to the 
parents and/or recognized caregivers of the Project beneficiaries 
based on their assessed needs through the administration of the  
DNAS;  
 
11.2  The existing programs of the DSWD that may be provided to the 
parents and/ or recognized caregivers include:  
 
11.2.1  AICS - parents and/or recognized caregivers may 
be referred to any of the services under the program 
and shall undergo the regular process of availment 
of financial and medical assistance. 
 
11.2.2   Sustainable Livelihood Program (SLP) - parents 
and/or recognized caregivers may be referred to the 
SLP - Regional Program Management Office for the 
livelihood assistance and employment facilitation. 
The SLP Coordinator shall be responsible in 
monitoring the progress of the parent and/or 
recognized caregivers after the provision of the SLP 
grants; and  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   35 

 
11.2.3  Therafee Project of the Kapit-Bisig Laban sa 
Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery 
of Social Services (KALAHI CIDDS) - parents and/or 
recognized caregivers may be referred for 
Cash-for-Work gearing towards psychosocial 
support and career development and enhancement 
interventions. 
 
11.3  Upon the receipt of the referral/s of the CIP or its regional 
counterparts, SLP and KALAHI CIDDS RPMOs, the eligibility 
screening, assessment and procedures in the provision of 
services shall be governed by DSWD M.C. No. 20, series of 2025 
or the “Amendment to M.C. No. 16, series of 2022 and M.C. No. 
06, series of 2023 of the Assistance to Individuals in Crisis 
Situations”, DSWD M.C. No. 03, series of 2025 or the “Omnibus 
Guidelines on the Implementation of SLP”, and “Revised 
Guidance Note for the Implementation of Cash for Work for 
Persons with Disabilities under the KALAHI CIDSS - Therafee 
Project”, respectively.  
 
11.4   The case manager shall diligently monitor the progress of each 
referral in close coordination with the STU/S and the assigned 
AICS worker, SLP coordinator or Therafee focal person; and  
 
11.5  All the referrals made by the case manager shall be documented 
and shall be kept for filing in the individual case folder of the 
Project beneficiaries.  
 
 
12) Debriefing Sessions of Project Implementers  
 
12.1  The LSWDO shall lead in the provision of debriefing sessions 
among case managers, Auxiliary Caregivers, assisting barangay 
volunteers, and other members of the Local Project 
Implementers;  
 
12.2  The debriefing sessions shall aim to prevent burnout, promote 
sustainability, fostering sustainability, fostering  a life outside 
caregiving, and building resilience and meaning;  
 
12.3  It may be conducted in a monthly or quarterly basis having  
partners, who is not involved in the Project implementation, as 
facilitators or resource persons;  
 
12.4  The STU/S in partnership with the LSWDO will also conduct a 
Caring for Carers Session among case managers, Auxiliary 
Caregivers, assisting barangay volunteers, and other members of 
the Local Project Implementers, once a year, subject to the 
availability of funding; and  
 
12.5  The PDAO shall be responsible in recording  the entire activity 
through narrative and photo documentations in order to take into 
account the good practices in the Project implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   36 

 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
REPORTING AND DOCUMENTATION  
 
The monitoring and reporting of Project implementation shall be undertaken on a regular 
basis to ensure compliance with program standards, assess progress in achieving project 
objectives, identify implementation gaps, and inform necessary technical and operational 
interventions. The reports generated shall serve as the primary basis for tracking 
accomplishments, documenting issues and challenges encountered, and recommending 
appropriate actions to improve project delivery and outcomes.  
 
 
Monitoring Tool  
Frequency of 
Submission  
Responsible Office  
Project Implementation 
Report  
Quarterly  Local Government Unit  
and Social Technology 
Unit/ Section  
Status Report  Semestral  Social Technology 
Bureau  
Year-End Full 
Implementation Report  
Annual  Social Technology 
Bureau  
 
 
The Local Project Implementers may also document best practices in the Project 
Implementation following the Guidelines set forth by the DSWD  through Administrative 
Order No. 05, series of 2016 or the “Good Practice Documentation Guidelines”.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   37 

 
CHAPTER VII 
 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
 
A) Social Technology Bureau  
 
1. Lead in the provision of Technical Assistance and  Resource Augmentation 
(TARA) in the implementation of activities under the Project;  
2. Provide technical assistance on the conduct of Learning Development 
Interventions to Field Office PMT and Local Project Implementers; 
3. Develop the Manual of Operations that details the specific procedures of this 
Pilot Implementation Manual;  
4. Organize the National Launching of the Project collaboration with Central 
Office PMT;  
5. Assist in the promotion of the Project to local government units and other 
stakeholders through the conduct of regular promotion;  
6. Recommend impact evaluation of the program to Policy Development Bureau 
after 5 years of national implementation; and 
7. Organize regular and special meetings, as deemed appropriate, for the PMT 
within the DSWD Central Office.  
 
B) Protective Services Bureau  
 
1. Provide technical assistance to Field Office PMT and Local Project 
Implementers on case management of children with disabilities; and  
2. Attend regular and special meetings of the PMT at the Central Office level.  
 
C) Policy Development and Planning Bureau  
 
1. Lead the Impact Evaluation after five (5) years of Project implementation for 
enhancements and/ or policy development; 
2. Provide technical inputs in the preparation of regional work and financial 
plans relevant to the Project; and 
3. Attend regular and special meetings of the PMT at the Central Office level.  
 
D) Crisis Intervention Program   
 
1. Provide fund augmentation support in the provision of DSA among eligible 
children with disabilities regularly in line with the existing rules and 
regulations of Assistance to Individuals in Crisis Situations;  
2. Facilitate the MOA partnership with the identified public/private therapy 
centers in all LGU pilot implementation sites; 
3. Verify the validity of documents submitted by Parents and/or Recognized 
Caregivers prior to the release of the AICS; and  
4. Attend regular and special meetings of the PMT at the Central Office level.  
 
 
E) Sustainable Livelihood Program  
 
1. Provide technical assistance and resource augmentation through the 
provision of seed capital among parents and/or recognized caregivers of the 
children with disabilities; and  
2. Attend regular and special meetings of the PMT at the Central Office level.  
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   38 

 
 
F) Information and  Communications Technology Management Service 
 
1. Assist in the operationalization of the Project Aruga Support Management 
System among Field Office PMT and Local Project Implementers;  
2. Provide technical assistance in the maintenance of  Project Aruga Support 
Management System; and  
3. Attend regular and special meetings of the PMT at the Central Office level.  
 
 
G) KALAHI-CIDSS 
 
1. Lead in the implementation and operational management of the TheraFee 
Project under the Cash-for-Work modality for Project Aruga beneficiaries; 
2. Provide technical assistance to Local Project Implementers, parents and/or 
recognized caregivers, and community volunteers on community-driven 
implementation, documentation, and compliance with project guidelines; and 
3. Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office Project Management 
Team. 
 
H) Digital Media Service  
 
1. Lead the media relations, promotion, and marketing of the Project through the 
official platforms of the DSWD;  
2. Provide technical assistance to the PMT within the Central Office on the 
periodic updating of the Project Communication Plan;  
3. Provide technical assistance to the PMT within the Central Office on the 
development and evaluation of Social Behavior Change Communication 
materials of the Project;  
4. Assist in the documentation of events and program milestones; and  
5. Attend regular and special meetings of the PMT at the Central Office level.  
 
 
I) Traditional Media Service  
 
1. Provide technical assistance on communications plans and policies of the 
Project including the facilitating of livestreams of special events and activities;  
2. Lead with the PMT within the Central Office on the development of Social 
Behavior Change Communication materials of the Project; and  
3. Attend regular and special meetings of the PMT at the Central Office level.  
 
 
J) National Council for Disability Affairs 
 
1. Lead in policy development and advocacy to support the inclusive social 
protection for children with disabilities and their families;  
2. Monitor and coordinate with agencies concerned for the comprehensive 
intervention for children with disabilities and their families;  
3. Maintain an updated registry of children with disabilities in coordination with 
the Department of Health and the corresponding counterpart offices in the 
regions; 
4. Provide necessary capability-building activities that will support the 
implementation of the Project;  
5. Provide support among children with disabilities through the Developmental 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   39 

 
Assessment, Rehabilitation and Empowerment (DARE) caravan; and  
6. Issue a resolution supporting the implementation of Project Aruga and 
enjoining the provision of technical and support services from PDAO and 
implementation sites.  
 
K) Department of Health  
 
1. Lead in the enhancement of the Philippine Registry of Persons with Disability 
as the  primary data reference of the Project;  
2. Provide technical assistance in the development and implementation of the 
disability identification and registration in the  Philippine Registry of Persons 
with Disability  including the use and roll out of the Harmonized Guidelines on 
Categorization of Disabilities;  
3. Provide rehabilitation services to children with disabilities through Department 
of Health hospitals;  
4. Assist in capacity building of Local Project Implementers especially the 
Auxiliary Caregivers enabling them to provide the necessary care and 
services to children with disabilities; . 
5. Participate in the establishment and operationalization of the referral 
networks for children with disabilities and relevant support in the project 
implementation at all levels.  
 
L) Department of Education  
 
1. Ensure the implementation of inclusive educational services for learners with 
disability through the implementation of Republic Act No. 11650, series of 
2022;  
2. Ensure that learners with disabilities are guaranteed their right of access to 
free public early and basic education services;  
3. Advocate referral of children with disabilities enrolled in public schools  
towards further assessment by health professionals and/or access to social 
services offered by the Local Social Welfare and Development Office;  
4. Ensure the implementation of the Child Find Policy for Learners with 
Disability Towards Inclusive Education; and  
5. Participate in the establishment and operationalization of the referral 
networks for children with disabilities and relevant support in the project 
implementation at all levels.  
 
M) Department of the Interior and Local Government  
 
1. Advocate in the creation of PDAO in every province, city and municipality as 
mandated by Republic Act No. 10070;  
2. Specific on children, help ensure that LGUs upgrade/sustain the functionality 
of PDAO to work for the inclusive social protection of children with disabilities; 
and  
3. Encourage LGUs to include and maintain the social services for children with 
disabilities in their comprehensive development plans. 
 
 
N) Philippine Health Insurance Corporation  
 
1. Ensure that children with disabilities shall be granted with immediate eligibility 
and access to preventive, curative, promotive, rehabilitative, and palliative 
care;  
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   40 

 
2. Strengthen the implementation of Z benefits for children with disabilities as a 
financial risk protection among the marginalized that are enrolled in the 
Project; and  
3. Participate in the establishment and operationalization of the Referral 
Network/s for children with disabilities and relevant support in the Project 
implementation at all levels.  
 
O) Council for the Welfare of Children  
 
1. Provide TARA on policy development and implementation of the Project 
Aruga;  
2. Monitor and evaluate the implementation of policies supporting the needs of 
children with disabilities and their families; and  
3. Participate in the establishment and operationalization of the referral 
networks for children with disabilities.  
 
P) Implementing Local Government Unit  
 
1. Implement the Project as outlined in this Pilot Implementation Manual in close 
coordination with the PMT of the DSWD Field Office;  
2. Oversee the implementation of the Project in collaboration with barangay 
officials and implementers;  
3. Allocate necessary funds for the Project including but not limited to 
representation expenses, venues and etc.;  
4. Assist the PMT at the regional level in the creation and maintenance of the 
Referral Pathway;  
5. Assist in the timely and orderly distribution of DSA among parents and/ or 
recognized caregivers of children with disabilities; and  
6. Ensures the periodic updating of Registry of Persons with Disabilities and 
CBMS as prescribed by existing national rules and regulations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Aruga Pilot Implementation Manual   l  Page   41 

 
Appendix A 
 

ANNEX 
A
 
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT 
 
 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
 
 This Memorandum of Agreement made and executed this __________ day of 
_______________ by and between: 
 
 
The     DEPARTMENT     OF     SOCIAL      WELFARE      AND DEVELOPMENT through 
the SOCIAL TECHNOLOGY BUREAU a national government agency duly organized and 
existing under the laws of the Republic of the Philippines, with principal address at DSWD 
Central Office, Constitution Hills, Batasan Complex, Quezon City, duly represented herein 
by its UNDERSECRETARY FOR INNOVATIONS AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT, 
EDUARDO M. PUNAY, pursuant to Special Order No. 3442, series of 2025 and 
hereinafter referred to as the “DSWD” 
 
-and- 
 
The DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT-FIELD OFFICE 
______,a national government agency with office address at ___________, _______ 
represented by its Regional Director _____________________, hereinafter referred to as 
the “SECOND PARTY”; 
 
-and- 
 
The LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT OF ______________ , through the LOCAL SOCIAL                        
WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE (LSWDO), with official address at 
_____________________, represented herein by Mayor __________________, pursuant 
to Sangguniang Bayan Resolution No. ___________series of _________and  hereinafter 
referred to as “LSWDO”; 
 
 
And further hereinafter referred to collectively as the “PARTIES”.  
 
WITNESSETH THAT: 
 
 
Whereas, the purpose of this MOA is to  establish a formal partnership to jointly implement, 
monitor, and sustain social protection programs, ensuring services efficiently and effectively 
reach disadvantaged, marginalized and vulnerable children with disabilities. This shall  
define the roles  and responsibilities of the DSWD, Field Offices, Local Government Units 
and other identified stakeholders. The Project Aruga has the following components namely: 
Data Management and Referral Network,  Disability Support Allowance, Capability Building, 
Community Mobilization Support and Auxiliary Services. 
  
Whereas, according to the 2022 study by the Department of Social Welfare and 
Development (DSWD) and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) on the Cost of Raising 
Children with Disabilities in the Philippines, the poverty rate for households with Children 
with Disabilities is 50% higher than other households, primarily driven by health related 
expenses and an expenditure requirement that is 40% to 80% higher for children with 
functional disabilities- representing  an equivalence scale of 1.4 to 1.8 such that existing 
support from disability cards and cash transfers covers only a fraction of the actual 10% to 
20% average extra cost incurred at the household level;” 
 
 

ANNEX 
A
 
Whereas, the DSWD is the primary government agency mandated to develop, 
administer, and implement comprehensive social welfare and protection programs and 
poverty-reduction solutions designed to uplift the living conditions and empower  the poor, 
vulnerable and disadvantaged children, youth, women, older persons, persons with 
disabilities, families or persons in crisis or at-risk, and communities needing assistance; 
  
Whereas, the DSWD through the STB, developed Project Aruga, is a community-based 
Project that provides disability inclusive social protection to children with disability and 
their families to address substantial unmet needs and provide comprehensive social 
services to provide opportunities towards the development of children with disabilities full 
potential, which has been assessed after its pilot testing to be Responsive, Effective, 
Efficient and Sustainable on the needs of the target sector;  
 
Whereas, the DSWD-FIELD OFFICE, as the implementing arm of the DSWD, is 
mandated to provide technical assistance to Local Government Units (LGUs), 
Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), Government Agencies (GAs), Academic 
Institutions, Professional Associations and other members of the civil society to effectively 
implement programs, Projects and services that will alleviate poverty and empower 
disadvantaged individuals, families and communities towards an improved quality of life;  
 
Whereas, the DSWD-FIELD OFFICE in attaining its mandate, seeks to establish a 
collaborative partnership for sharing of resources in the implementation of Project Aruga 
within CY 2026; 
 
Whereas, the DSWD, DSWD-FO and LSWDO recognize the vital role of the LGUs in 
providing a direct social service and developmental services to the respond to the needs 
of children with disabilities; 
 
Whereas, the Implementation Site through the LSWDO in close collaboration with the 
Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office (PDAO), signifies its full support and willingness to 
become one of the expansion sites for the Project; and  
 
NOW THEREFORE, for and in consideration of the foregoing premises, the Parties have 
mutually agreed as follows: 
 
 
Article I 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARTIES 
 
The First Party (DSWD-Central Office) shall: 
 
1. Agree to review and amend this contract as necessary to ensure its continued 
relevance and effectiveness 
2. Acknowledge their mutual commitment to the faithful and timely compliance with all 
terms, conditions, and obligations set forth herein.  
3. Provide budgetary requirements for the implementation, evaluation and social 
marketing activities of the Project; 
4. Lead in the demonstration of the Project mechanisms in close coordination with 
concerned agencies, DSWD Office/Bureau/Service/Unit and concerned Field Offices; 
5. Develop and/or ensure the availability of a standard module that will be used by the 
carers and service providers in providing care and support to children with disability 
6. Develop key messaging, contents, and layouts of the Social Behavior Change 
Communication (SBCC) materials and activities based on the approved Project 
communication plan. 
 

ANNEX 
A
 
7. Monitor the Project implementation in coordination with the Field Offices through the 
use of developed monitoring and reporting tools as well as baseline and endline 
survey among the beneficiaries; 
8. Initiate conduct of consultation meetings and Program orientations for the expansion 
with concerned agencies, partners and stakeholders;  
9. Provide technical assistance to the field office and other stakeholders during the 
implementation of the Project activities; 
10. Prepare monitoring reports, documentation of the pilot implementation and conduct 
of Project evaluation as basis for adoption and/or institutionalization; and 
11. Develop and enrich Project guidelines and materials based on the results of the 
Project expansion. 
12. The DSWD through the Social Technology Unit of the Field Offices I, III, IVA, IVB, V, 
VI, VII, XI and National Capital Region, shall ensure that the roles and 
responsibilities of the DSWD under this MOA is duly complied with,” 
 
 
 
 
The Second Party (DSWD Field Office) shall: 
 
1. Provide updates to the Third Party on the following: 
a. Status of the identification of LGU as Project implementation site/s. 
b. Ensure availability of venues and other logistical requirements for the 
capability building (if necessary).  
c. Conduct regular and close monitoring during the Project implementation.  
2. Assist in the project implementation and provision of technical assistance  
3. Provide necessary technical assistance and resource augmentation to the Third 
Party to ensure that the basic Project standards and objectives are met; 
4. Ensure provision of capacity-building activity and training for the Third Party relative 
to the Project implementation; 
5. Ensure support from concerned Divisions/Units for the Project implementation   
6. Coordinate with existing regional mechanisms during the Project Project 
implementation; 
7. Monitor the Project and conduct regular coordination meetings in the  course of its 
implementation;  
8. Submit Project implementation reports to the DSWD and produce full documentation 
of activities 
9. Assist in the evaluation/assessment of the Project after all activities are completed 
through the use of the developed monitoring and reporting tools, as well as baseline 
and endline survey among the beneficiaries 
10. Implement activities at the local government units level as indicated in the approved 
project guidelines of the DSWD  
11. Ensure submission of reportorial  requirements to the DSWD , compliant to COA 
Circular No. 94-013 or the Rules and Regulations in the Grant, Utilization and 
Liquidation of Funds Transferred to Implementing Agencies.  
  
 
The Third Party (Local Government Unit / Implementation Site) shall: 
  
1. Form a local  Project Management Team and designate focal person through the 
issuance of a Local Executive Order/  Resolution; 
 

ANNEX 
A
 
2. Identify beneficiaries and specific communities within the locality where the  Project 
shall be implemented; 
3. Participate in all capacity building and other activities related to the Project; 
4. Implement activities at the local level as indicated in the Project Guidelines;  
5. Ensure provision of the needed support services to the beneficiaries; 
6. Ensure submission of required documentation of activities and reports as a result of 
monitoring and technical assistance conducted; 
7. Designate members of the Project Management Team for the implementation of 
the Project; 
8. Designate at least one (1) Social Worker as case manager of the children with 
disabilities; and  
9. Ensure participation of the barangay and the community beneficiaries in community 
resources mobilization which includes, but is not limited to identification of 
beneficiaries, capacity building, action planning, implementation, management,  
project monitoring and evaluation. 
 
 
Article II 
DATA PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
The Parties agree that the provisions of Republic Act (RA) No. 10173 or the Data Privacy 
Act of 2012 shall be integrated into this MOA and upheld, and the same principles of 
transparency, legitimate purpose, and proportionality shall govern the implementation of this 
MOA. No data or information arising from this MOA shall be disclosed to any third and/or 
private entity except the government for the purpose of regulation. 
  
A Data Sharing Agreement (DSA) may be entered in compliance with the Data Privacy Act 
of 2012 to support the execution of this Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) and in the event 
of the need to share Personal Data or information between the Parties herein. No personal 
information or data shall be shared between Parties herein unless a DSA shall have been 
duly executed. 
 
Article III 
DEFAULT, DELAY, BREACHES 
 
 
In cases of default, delay or breach, the Defaulting Party shall mean, with respect to the 
aggrieved party, the occurrence of any one or more of the following: 
 
a. Any representation or warranty made by the Defaulting Party herein is false or 
misleading in any material respect when made of when deemed made or repeated 
and has a material adverse effect on the transactions contemplated by this MOA; 
and 
 
b. Failure to perform any material obligation set forth in this MOA, if such failure is 
not remedied within five (5) working days after the Defaulting Party’s receipt of 
written notice thereof. 
 
 
Any delay or failure in performance hereunder by either party shall be excused if, and to the 
extent caused, by occurrences beyond such party’s control, including but not limited to 
restraints of the government, acts of God, force majeure, sabotage or any cause whether 
similar or dissimilar to those already specified which cannot be controlled by such party. 
 

ANNEX 
A
 
 
The Aggrieved Party shall deliver to the Defaulting Party a Notice (“Notice of Default, Delay 
or Breach”) specifying the reasonable detail of the event of default. If within thirty (30) 
calendar days after the receipt of the Notice of Default, Delay or Breach by the Defaulting 
Party, the Event of Default has not been remedied, the Aggrieved Party may terminate this 
MOA and pursue any remedy available to it under this MOA. 
 
If an Event of Default with respect to a Defaulting Party shall have occurred and be 
continuing, the Aggrieved party shall have the right to: 
 
i. Designate a day, no earlier than the day such notice is effective and no later than thirty  
  (30) calendar days after such notice is effective, as an early termination date (“Early  
  Termination Date”) to accelerate all amounts owing between the Parties and to liquidate  
   and  terminate this MOA; and 
ii. Suspend performance 
 
 
For simple breach: If any Party commits a simple breach, merely fails to comply on time or in 
the manner agreed upon, without indicating bad faith or gross negligence of any of the terms 
of this MOA. The aggrieved party must notify the offending party of such breach. The 
offending party shall then have ten (10) days from receipt of such notice within which to 
remedy such breach. 
 
For gross violations: If any Party commits gross violation, indicating bad faith or gross 
negligence of any of the terms of this MOA, or fails to remedy a simple breach within the 
given period, the aggrieved party may terminate this contract by serving written notice to the 
offending Party specifically indicating therein the cause of termination. 
 
Article IV 
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
This MOA shall be implemented in accordance with the terms and conditions herein 
stipulated. Failure on the part of any party to comply with any provision of this MOA shall 
warrant its revocation and shall give rise to the initiating appropriate administrative, civil and 
criminal cases against the erring party. 
 
Article V 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
 
In case of conflict among the Parties, arising from this MOA, all Parties agree to freely and 
voluntarily submit themselves to necessary consultation and negotiation for purposes of 
amicable settlement and find a mutually acceptable solution to their dispute within thirty (30) 
working days from notice by the other Party of such conflict. 
 
Should the Parties fail to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute, the same shall be 
submitted to arbitration, in accordance with Republic Act (RA) No. 9285 or the Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Act of 2004. However, should the dispute between the Parties reach the 
courts of law, the parties agree that the proper courts of Quezon City shall have exclusive 
jurisdiction over the same. 
 
 
Article VI 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
 

ANNEX 
A
 
Any intellectual creation or property resulting from the implementation of this MOA shall be 
subject to and protected according to the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines and 
its implementing rules and regulations. 
 
Article VII 
SEVERABILITY 
 
If any of the provisions of this MOA is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be void or 
unenforceable, in the whole or in part, such provision shall be deemed deleted from this 
MOA but the remaining provisions thereof shall remain in full effect. 
 
 
Article VIII 
EFFECTIVITY AND TERMINATION 
 
This MOA may be terminated by any Party upon the service of a written notice at least thirty 
(30) calendar days prior to the intended date of termination, based on any of the following 
grounds: 
 
i. Material breach or violation of any provision of this MOA, including failure of any Party to 
comply with or perform its obligations; 
 
ii. Occurrence of force majeure that renders the performance of obligations by any Party no 
longer feasible; 
 
iii. Any misrepresentation or false warranty by any Party in connection with this MOA; 
 
iv. Other analogous circumstances justifying termination. 
 
The termination of this MOA shall not affect the validity, duration, and completion of any 
Program, activity, or contract that are already executed pursuant to this MOA or by virtue of 
separate agreements, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the Parties.” 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this contract to be signed in their names 
on _____________ in ___________________, Philippines. 
 
 
FOR THE DSWD through SOCIAL 
TECHNOLOGY BUREAU: 
FOR THE DSWD FIELD OFFICE:  
 
 
EDUARDO M. PUNAY  
Undersecretary  
Innovations and Program Development Group 
 
 
[NAME]  
Regional Director  
DSWD Field Office - [______________________]  
 
FOR THE CITY GOVERNMENT OF [LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT]  
 
 
HON. [NAME]  
Local Government Unit of [_____________]  
  
 

ANNEX 
A
 
SIGNED IN THE PRESENCE OF:  
 
 
HELEN Y. SUZARA  
Director IV  
Social Technology Bureau 
 
 
 
[NAME]  
Local Social Welfare and Development Officer  
Local Government Unit of [_____________]  
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES) 
CITY/MUNICIPALITY OF ______) SS. 
    
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES) 
____________________________) S.S. 
 
BEFORE ME, a Notary Public for and in ______________, on this ___ day of ___________, 
2026, personally appeared the following with their respective competent evidence of 
identification: 
 
xxx  
 
known to me and to me known to be the same persons who executed the foregoing 
instrument and they acknowledged to me that the same is their free and voluntary act and 
deed as well as that of the entities represented herein. 
 
This instrument refers to a MOA which consists of ___ (__) pages, including the page 
whereon this acknowledgment is written, each and every page of which, on the left margin, 
having been signed by the Parties hereto and their witnesses, and sealed with my notarial 
seal. 
 
WITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL on the date and at the place first above written. 
 
 
 
 
Doc No.:  ________; 
Page No.:  ________; 
Book No.:  ________;  
Series of ________.  
 
 
 
 

 
Appendix B 
 

ANNEX B
 
                                        
TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE  
LOCAL PROJECT IMPLEMENTERS UNDER PROJECT ARUGA  
 
 
I. Rationale 
 
The Social Technology Bureau, as the program development arm of the Department 
of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), in collaboration and partnership with 
United Nations  Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Department of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade of the  Australian government, has launched a disability-inclusive social 
protection project aimed at addressing the barriers faced by children with disabilities. 
This initiative is part of the Department's Social Protection Plan for 2023-2028 and 
rolling work plan for 2023 between DSWD and UNICEF, building on previous 
research on the challenges faced by children with disabilities in the Philippines. 
 
Pursuant to the DSWD Innovations and Program Development Group M.C. No. 02, 
series of 2026 that governs the implementation of the Project, the Local Project 
Implementers, must be constituted that will be composed of key offices within the 
pilot Local Government Unit and may be expanded to include Civil Society 
Organizations whose focus is the provision of services to Children with Disabilities. 
 
This Terms of Reference (TOR) is issued to define the composition, functions, and 
responsibilities of the Local Project Implementers which shall serve as the lead in the 
local governance structure for the operationalization of the Project. 
 
 
II. Objectives  
 
The creation of Project Aruga Local Project Implementers shall be created by the 
pilot Local Government Unit through a local legislation either Executive Order or 
Local Resolution issued by the Sanguniang Bayan Lunsod or Local Chief Executive.  
 
 
III. Structure and Functions 
 
The Local Project Implementers is established to facilitate the implementation 
activities of the Project Aruga in pilot areas/ LGU in Regions I, II, III, IVA, 
MIMAROPA, V, VI, XI and National Capital Region. The LPI shall be led by the  Local 
Social Welfare and Development Office. The minimum members of the LPI shall 
include:  
 
● Local Social Welfare and Development Office 
● Persons with Disability Affairs Office 
● Local Health Office 
● Schools Division Office 
● Public Employment Service Office 
● Early Childhood Care and Development 
 
The Roles and Functions of the members of the LPI are as follows: 
 
 
Local Project Implementers  Roles and Functions 
Local Social Welfare and 
Development Office (LSWDO) 
● Designate Case Manager/s, preferably Social 
Worker, who shall conduct the social case 

ANNEX B
 
 
Local Project Implementers  Roles and Functions 
management of Project beneficiaries;  
● Participate in the pre-implementation activities of 
the Project on Profiling and Deliberation of 
Potential Beneficiaries;  
● Certify the eligible children with disabilities 
assessed with severe and moderate case;  
● Ensures the periodic updating of the 
Community-based Monitoring System (CBMS) as 
prescribed by existing national rules and 
regulations;  
● Oversee the implementation of the Project in 
coordination with Barangay officials and 
volunteers and other local implementers;  
● Submit the Report on the Project Implementation 
quarterly to DSWD Field Office in coordination 
with Persons with Disability Affairs Office;  
● Responsible for the case management and 
facilitation of referrals of the identified 
beneficiaries for appropriate intervention based 
on the assessed needs;  
● Lead the facilitation of case conference for the 
identified special cases of Children with 
Disabilities;  
● Conduct of Network Meetings with partner 
stakeholders;  
● Lead in the recruitment of qualified Auxiliary 
Caregivers and their endorsement to the DSWD 
Field Office;  
● Participate in all efforts concerning children with 
disability in the social welfare system, education 
and health services, and other relevant 
interventions;  
● Assist the timely and orderly distribution of 
Disability Support Allowance among parents 
and/or recognized caregivers of the Children with 
Disabilities and honorarium of trained Auxiliary 
Caregivers;  
● Allocate necessary funds for the Project including 
but not limited to representation expenses, 
venues and etc; and  
● Review and approve the forwarded progress 
notes on the conduct of homecare support 
services to the children with disabilities and their 
families 
 
Persons with Disability Affairs 
Office (PDAO) 
● Participate in the pre-implementation activities 
of the Project on Profiling and Deliberation of 
Potential Beneficiaries;  
● Provide technical assistance on the registration 
of children with disabilities in the pilot area;  
● Ensures the periodic updating of the Registry 
of Persons with Disabilities as prescribed by 
existing national rules and regulations;  
● Provide the masterlist of registered children 

ANNEX B
 
 
Local Project Implementers  Roles and Functions 
with disabilities in the Local Government Unit 
for targeting of potential beneficiaries of the 
Project;  
● Certify the eligible children with disabilities 
assessed with severe and moderate case;  
● Issuance of Identification Card to identified 
beneficiaries of the Project;  
● Facilitate referrals of Persons with Disability to 
appropriate agencies or established referral 
network, based on assessed needs;  
● Reinforce the implementation of laws and 
policies concerning Persons with Disabilities in 
the pilot LGU;  
● Submit the Report on the Project 
Implementation quarterly to DSWD Field Office 
in coordination with Local Social Welfare and 
Development Office;  
● Recruit the potential Auxiliary Caregivers for 
provision of homecare and support services;  
● Monitor the trained Auxiliary Caregivers and 
review the submitted progress notes on the 
conduct of homecare support services to the 
children with disabilities and their families;  
● Provide Certification of Rendered Services of 
the trained Auxiliary Caregivers every month;  
● Assist the timely and orderly distribution of 
honorarium of trained Auxiliary Caregivers;  
● Lead the celebration of International of Persons 
with Disabilities and National Disability Rights 
Week; and  
● Attend Network Meetings with partner 
stakeholders.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Health Office (LHO) ● Provide technical assistance on the 
implementation of Early Detection and 
Disability Prevention initiatives in the pilot 
LGUs, based on assessed needs;  
● Provide relevant capacity building activities to 
Auxiliary Caregivers to further their knowledge 
and skills in the provision of Home Care 
Support Services; and  
● Attend regular or special meetings of the Local 
Project Implementers.  
Schools Division / District 
Office  
● Provide technical assistance in accessing 
Special Needs Education (SNED) and 
Alternative Learning System (ALS) services 

ANNEX B
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. Secretariat 
 
The Local Chief Executive shall designate the Secretariat function to any of the 
members of the LPI, and shall be responsible on the following:  
 
● Prepare agenda and issue notices for meetings, and ensure all necessary 
documents requiring discussion or comment are attached to the agenda one 
week before the meeting; 
● Document the proceedings and prepare minutes of the meetings to be 
distributed to all members one (1) week after the meeting; 
● Translate the committee recommendations and technical inputs into action 
plan for better implementation of the pilot project; and 
● Convene the Local Project Implementer team members once in every two (2) 
months. 
 
 
 
] 
 
 
V. Frequency of Meetings 
 
Local Project Implementers  Roles and Functions 
among identified children with disabilities;  
● Facilitate the enrollment of Project beneficiaries 
to the Inclusive Learning Resource Center 
through reasonable accomodation;  
● Maintain the requirements for a functional 
Inclusive Learning Resource Center as 
provided by Republic Act 11650;and  
● Attend regular or special meetings of the Local 
Project Implementers.  
Local Public Employment 
Service Office (PESO) 
● Provide access to local employment 
opportunities, trainings, livelihood assistance 
and other special programs for the parents 
and/or recognized caregivers of the children 
with disabilities in the pilot LGU, based on 
assessed needs; and  
● Attend regular or special meetings of the Local 
Project Implementers.  
Early Childhood Care and 
Development 
● Provide orientation on Home-based ECCD 
Program among parents and recognized 
caregivers; 
● Act as a Resource Person on Roll-out training 
on Homecare and Community Support 
Services to Auxiliary Caregivers; 
● Promote inclusive education among children 
with disabilities within the Child Development 
Center and their transition to Inclusive Learning 
Resource Center;  
● Attend regular or special meetings of the Local 
Project Implementers.  

ANNEX B
 
 
The Local Project Implementers Team will hold its regular meeting once in every two 
(2) months. However, the team  may hold special meetings as needed. 
Representation expenses during regular meetings will be funded by the DSWD Field 
Office subject to the availability of funds and may be augmented by the Local Social 
Welfare and Development Office or by the host office within the Local Government 
Unit. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Appendix C 
 

ANNEX C
 
 
TERMS OF REFERENCE OF  
PROJECT MANAGEMENT TEAM OF PROJECT ARUGA  
 
I. Rationale 
 
The Social Technology Bureau, as the program development arm of the Department 
of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), in collaboration and partnership with 
United Nations  Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Department of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade of the  Australian government, has launched a disability-inclusive social 
protection project aimed at addressing the barriers faced by children with disabilities. 
This initiative is part of the Department's Social Protection Plan for 2023-2028 and 
rolling work plan for 2023 between DSWD and UNICEF building on previous 
research on the challenges faced by children with disabilities in the Philippines. 
Pursuant to the DSWD Innovations and Program Development Group M.C. No. 02, 
series of 2026 that governs the implementation of the Project, a Project Management 
Team (PMT), shall be constituted composed of the key offices within the DSWD Field 
Office, whose focus is the provision of services to Children with Disabilities as 
beneficiaries of the Project. 
In addition, the Regional Committee on Disability Affairs, chaired by the DSWD and 
supported by its member agencies and partners, shall monitor and coordinate the 
implementation of the Project along the dimensions of remediation, early detection, 
and rehabilitation of children with disabilities. 
This Terms of Reference (TOR) is issued to define the composition, functions, and 
responsibilities of the PMT at the Field Office level (hereinafter referred to as the 
“Field Office PMT”, which shall serve as the lead regional governance structure for 
the operationalization of the Project. 
II. Objectives  
 
The Field Office PMT is established to mirror the functions of the Central Office PMT 
at the regional level and to ensure coordinated, accountable, and rights-based 
implementation of the Project.  
 
The Field Office PMT specifically aims to: 
 
● Provide technical assistance and serve as the regional coordinating body for 
the implementation of the Project; 
● Ensure the delivery of support services consistent with the mandates of 
member offices and partner agencies in the region; 
● Coordinate with implementing Local Government Units (LGUs) and Local 
Project Implementers in the conduct of project activities, monitoring, and 
evaluation as indicated in the approved Design; and 
● Promote inter-agency complementation, systems thinking, and participatory 
governance in the delivery of inclusive social protection for children with 
disabilities. 
 
III. Structure and Functions 
 
The Field Office PMT shall be chaired by the Regional Director of the DSWD Field 
Office or the Assistant Regional Director for Operations.  
 
Consistent with the mirroring principle established in the M.C., the Field Office PMT 
 

ANNEX C
 
shall be composed of the following: 
 
● Social Technology Unit (lead) 
● Protective Services Division,  
● Policy Development and Planning Section 
● Crisis Intervention Section/ Program 
● Sustainable Livelihood Program - Regional Program Management 
Office 
● Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated 
Delivery of Social Services (KALAHI CIDDS) - Regional Program 
Management Office  
● Information and Communications Technology Management Unit 
● Communications / Media Relations Unit 
● Sectoral Focal for Persons with Disabilities  
 
Membership may be expanded by resolution of the Field Office PMT to include other 
relevant regional offices and partners, subject to the concurrence of the Chairperson 
and consistent with the objectives of the Project. 
 
Field Office PMT 
Member 
Functions and Responsibilities 
DSWD Field Office 
Social Technology Unit (Lead) 
● Lead in the provision of Technical Assistance and 
Resource Augmentation (TARA) in the implementation of 
Project activities at the regional and pilot Local 
Government Units level;  
● Provide technical assistance on the conduct of Learning 
and Development Interventions for Local Project 
Implementers in pilot Local Government Units;  
● Lead in the operationalization of the Implementation 
Guidelines and ensure faithful application of the M.C. 
within the Field Office;  
● Convene regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team; and  
● Coordinate with the Social Technology Bureau on policy 
guidance, project design, and reporting requirements. 
 
Protective Services Division 
● Provide technical assistance to Local Project 
Implementers on case management of children with 
disabilities; and  
● Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team. 
 
Policy Development and Planning Section 
● Provide technical inputs in the preparation of regional 
work and financial plans relevant to the Project;  
● Participate in the field evaluation of the Project after its 
pilot implementation; and  
 

ANNEX C
 
Field Office PMT 
Member 
Functions and Responsibilities 
● Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team. 
 
 
Crisis Intervention Section / Program 
● Provide fund augmentation support for eligible 
beneficiaries, consistent with the existing rules and 
regulations of the Assistance to Individuals in Crisis 
Situations (AICS);  
● Verify the validity of documents submitted by Parents 
and/or Recognized Caregivers prior to the release of the 
AICS; and  
● Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team. 
 
Sustainable Livelihood Program 
● Provide technical assistance and resource augmentation 
through the provision of seed capital to parents and/or 
recognized caregivers of children with disabilities; and  
● Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team. 
 
KALAHI-CIDSS 
● Lead in the implementation and operational 
management of the TheraFee Project under the 
Cash-for-Work modality for Project Aruga beneficiaries; 
● Provide technical assistance to Local Project 
Implementers, parents and/or recognized caregivers, 
and community volunteers on community-driven 
implementation, documentation, and compliance with 
project guidelines; and 
● Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team. 
 
Information and Communications Technology 
Management Unit 
● Assist in the operationalization of the Project Aruga 
Support Management System among Local Project 
Implementers;  
● Provide technical assistance in the maintenance of the 
Project Aruga Support Management System within the 
region; and  
● Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team. 
 
Communications / Media Relations Unit 
 

ANNEX C
 
Field Office PMT 
Member 
Functions and Responsibilities 
● Lead the regional media relations and promotion of the 
Project through the official platforms of the Field Office. 
● Document events and Project milestones in the region. 
● Attend regular and special meetings of the Field Office 
Project Management Team. 
 
 
IV. Secretariat 
 
The Social Technology Unit of the DSWD Field Office shall serve as Secretariat of 
the Field Office PMT and shall perform the following functions: 
 
● Prepare the agenda and issue notices of meetings, ensuring that all 
documents requiring discussion or comment are circulated to members at 
least one (1) week before each meeting; 
● Document the proceedings and prepare the minutes of meetings, to be 
distributed to all members within one (1) week after each meeting; 
● Translate the recommendations and technical inputs of the Field Office PMT 
into operational plans for the implementation of the Project; 
● Maintain the records, registries, and reports of the Field Office PMT, and 
submit periodic reports to the Central Office PMT through the Social 
Technology Bureau; and 
● Convene the Field Office PMT in regular and special meetings, in accordance 
with this TOR. 
 
 
V. Frequency of Meetings 
 
The Field Office PMT shall hold regular meetings once every two (2) months. Special 
meetings may be called as the need arises, upon the initiative of the Chairperson or 
upon written request of at least one-third of the members. Representation expenses 
for regular meetings shall be funded by the Social Technology Bureau subject to the 
availability of funds under the General Appropriations Act.  
 
 
 

 
Appendix D 
 

ANNEX D
 
PROJECT ARUGA  
MAPPING OF POTENTIAL PUBLIC/ PRIVATE THERAPY CENTER PARTNERS   
 
 
NAME OF 
THE 
ENTITY  
SERVICES 
OFFERED  
ADDRESS  
CONTACT 
PERSON  
CONTACT 
DETAILS 
(Contact 
Number and 
E-mail 
address)  
REMARKS  
      
      
      
      
 
 
 

 
Appendix E 
 

 
  
 
ARUGA PROJECT PROFILING AND ASSESSMENT TOOL 
Date of Interview: ______________  Time Started: ________    Time Ended: ________    
Name of Interviewer: __________________________ 
Household ID No.:   Region:  
Pantawid Member? Province: 
Name of Respondent: 
__________________________________  
Address: 
 
CHILD WITH DISABILITY PROFILE 
R1. Name  
R2. Address  
R3. Contact Number  
R4. Date of Birth  
R5. Religion     Code: 
R6. IP Membership  Code: 
R7. Sex  Code: 
R8. Highest Educational Attainment  Code: 
R9. Disability/ Special Needs  Code: 
R10. Critical Illness  Code: 
 
Religion 
0 None 
1 Roman Catholic 
2 Islam 
3 Iglesia ni Cristo 
4 Aglipay 
5 Seventh Day Adventist 
6 Bible Baptist Church 
7 Jehovah’s Witness 
8 United Methodists Church 
9 Tribal Religions 
10 Other ______________ 
IP Membership Sex 
1 Male 
2 Female 
0 Non-IP 
1 Aeta 
2 Ati 
3 Badjao 
4 Bago 
5 Batak 
6 Bukidnon 
7 B’laan 
8 Cimaron 
9 Cuyonen 
10 Dumagat 
11 Ibaloi 
12 Ibanag 
13 Itom 
14 Kankanaey 
15 Mandaya 
16 Mangyan 
17 Manobo 
18 Palawano 
19 Pullon 
20 Subanen 
21 Tagbanuas 
22 Tau’t Bato 
23 Teduray 
24 T’boli 
25 Others, please 
specify: 
________________ 
Highest Educational Attainment 
1 Without Formal Education 
2 Elementary 
3 Elementary Graduate 
4 High School 
5 High School Graduate 
6 Vocational Course 
7 Voc. Course Graduate 
8 College 
9 College Graduate 
10 Post College Degree 
Disability/Special 
Needs: 
0 None  
1 Physical 
2 Intellectual 
3 Learning 
4 Visual 
5 Mental 
6 Psychosocial 
7 Deaf/Hard of Hearing 
8 Speech and 
Language impairment 
9 Cancer 
10 Rare Disease 
 
Critical Illness: 
0 None 
1 Cancer 
2 Cardio-vascular Disease 
3 Paralysis 
4 Organ Failure 
5 Others, specify: 
 
 

 
 
FAMILY PROFILE 
Sinu-sino ang mga miyembro ng inyong pamilya? Ang miyembro ng pamilya ay ang mga indibidwal na kaugnay sa dugo, sa bisa 
ng kasal o sa pamamagitan ng pag-aampon, o paninirahan sa isang tahanan. Kabilang din ang mga miyembro na hindi 
kadalasan naninirahan sa tahanan ngunit ang sweldo o gastusin ay kabilang sa buong kita o gastos ng pamilya, halimbawa, 
anak na nag-aaral sa ibang lugar pero ang allowance ay galing sa magulang, miyembro ng pamilya na OFW o nagtatrabaho sa 
ibang lugar na nagpapadala ng sustento. Ang mga kasama sa tirahan na hindi kaugnay sa pamilya ay hindi kabilang. 
 
H1. Bilang ng Miyembro (Family Size): ________ 
H2. Name 
H3. 
Relationsh
ip to the 
Head of 
the Family 
H4. 
Civil 
Statu
s 
H5. 
Age 
H6. 
Sex 
H7. 
Occupa
tion 
H8. 
Occupa
tion 
Class 
H9. 
Disabil
ity/ 
Specia
l 
Needs 
H10. 
Critica
l 
Illness 
H11. 
Solo 
Parent 
1           
2           
3           
4           
5           
6           
7           
8           
9           
1
0 
          
 
 

 
Relationship to the 
Family Head: 
1 Family Head 
2 Spouse 
3 Offspring 
4 Parent 
5 Sibling 
6 Nephew/Niece 
7 Uncle/Aunt 
8 Cousin 
9 Grandparent 
10 Son/Daughter-in-Law 
11 Brother/Sister-in-Law 
12 Grandchild 
13 Father/Mother-in-Law 
14 Others 
Civil Status: 
1 Single 
2 Married  
3 Cohabitation (Live-in/Common-Law) 
4 Divorced 
5 Separated 
6 Widowed 
 
Occupation: 
0 Not Applicable 
1 Special Occupations 
2 Officials of government & special interest 
orgs, corp. executive, manager, managing 
proprietor/supervisor 
3 Professionals 
4 Technicians & Assoc. Professionals 
5 Clerks 
6 Service worker/shop & market worker 
7 Farmers, forestry worker & fishermen 
8 Craft and related trade workers 
9 Plant/machine operator & assembler 
10 Laborers & unskilled workers 
11 Others, specify: 
Occupation Class: 
0 Not Applicable 
1 Not employed but looking 
for 
    work in the past 3 
months 
2 Not employed and not 
looking 
   for work in the past 3 
months 
3 Self-employed 
4 Private Company 
Employee 
5 Government Employee 
6 Pensioner 
7 Overseas Filipino Worker 
(OFW) 
8 Student 
 
Solo Parent: 
1 Yes 
2 No 
Disability/Special Needs: 
0 None  
1 Physical 
2 Intellectual 
3 Learning 
4 Visual 
5 Mental 
  
6 Psychosocial 
7 Deaf/Hard of Hearing 
8 Speech and Language 
impairment 
9 Cancer 
10 Rare Disease 
Critical Illness: 
0 None  
1 Cancer 
2 Cardio-vascular disease 
3 Paralysis 
4 Organ Failure 
5 Others, specify: 
__________________ 
 
 

 
I. Housing, Sanitation and Water  
 
A. Housing Condition 
 
1. What type of construction materials are the roofs and outer walls made of? 
a. Makeshift/salvaged/improvised materials 
b. Mixed but predominantly makeshift/salvaged/improvised materials 
c. Light materials such as bamboo/sawali/ cogon/ nipa but not sturdy and 
durable 
d. Mixed but predominantly light materials 
e. Strong materials such as concrete/brick/ stone or wood or half galvanized iron 
and half concrete or galvanized iron/aluminum or glass 
f. Bamboo/ sawali/cogon /nipa but sturdy and durable 
 
2. What is the tenure status of the house and lot does the family have? 
a. Own house and lot 
b. Own house, rent-free lot without consent of owner 
c. Own house, rent-free lot with consent of owner 
d. Rent-free house and lot without consent of owner 
e. Rent-free house and lot with consent of owner 
f. Rented house and lot for less than three years 
g. Own house, rented lot for less than three years 
h. Other tenure status, specify:  _____________________________________ 
 
3. Are there any modifications in the house to accommodate the child's disability? 
a. Yes.  
Specify:  _____________________________________________________ 
b. No 
 
4. What is the main source of electricity in the dwelling place? 
a. Electric company 
b. Generator 
c. Solar 
d. Battery 
e. Others, specify: ________________________________________ 
f. None 
 
B. Water Supply 
 
5. What is your family’s main source of water supply? 
a. Unprotected spring, lake, river, rain, dug well 
b. Commercial sources, e.g., tanker, truck, peddler (except bottled water) 
c. Source of safe drinking water but the time to collect water including the time 
to walk to the water source, collect it and return is longer than 30 minutes 
d. Own use faucet community water system (gripo) 
e. Shared faucet community water system 
f. Own use tubed/piped deep well 
g. Shared tubed/ piped deep well, tubed/piped shallow well 
h. Bought bottled water including those being delivered 
i. Others, specify: ______________________________________________ 
 
C. Sanitation 
 
6. What is the main type of toilet facility the family uses? 
a. Water-sealed, sewer septic tank, used exclusively by the family 
b. Water-sealed, sewer septic tank, shared with other families  
c. Closed pit 
 

 
d. Open pit 
e. Others (pail system, and others), specify: ___________________ 
f. None 
 
7. Is the toilet accessible for the child? 
a. Yes 
b. No 
 
8. What is the main system of garbage disposal adopted by the family? 
a. Garbage collection 
b. Burning 
c. Composting 
d. Recycling 
e. Waste Segregation 
f. Pit with cover 
g. Pit without cover  
h. Throwing of garbage in rivers, vacant lots, etc. 
i. Others, specify: _______________________________________ 
 
 
II. Health 
A.  General Health 
1. Has the child received all recommended vaccinations?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
2. Does the child have any ongoing health conditions?  
a. Yes.  
 Specify:  _____________________________________________________ 
b. No 
 
B.  Health Expenses 
3. Please provide the corresponding health expenses in a month for each of the 
following areas, as applicable:  
 
Areas of concerns 
Total  
(per month) 
Remarks 
Food (e.g. milk, cookies, oatmeal, etc.)   
Medication ● Maintenance   
● Vitamins   
● Other related medicines   
Therapy (physical, occupational, speech)   
Hygiene-related needs   
Other health needs   
Over-all Total   
 

 
 
C.  Access to Health Services 
4. Has the child availed health services in the past 6 months? 
a. Yes.  
What health services availed? ____________________________________ 
b. No.  
5. Is the health facility accessible for the child? 
a. Yes 
b. No 
6. Are there any barriers to accessing health care services (e.g., transportation, 
consultation fees, etc.) 
a. Yes.  
 Specify:  _____________________________________________________ 
b. No 
 
III. Education 
A. Educational Status 
 
1. Is the child currently enrolled in school? 
a. Yes 
Grade/Year Level: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
Why not? _____________________________________________________ 
 
B. School Accessibility 
 
2. Is the school equipped with physically accessibility features (ramps, handrails and 
grab bars, etc.)  
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
c. Not Applicable 
 
3. Are there special education programs available? 
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
c. Not Applicable 
 
4. Does the child receive any learning support (special education teacher, assistant, 
etc.) 
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
c. Not Applicable 
 
C. Learning Materials 
 
5. Are there accessible learning materials available for the child (braille, audio books, 
etc.)? 
 

 
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
c. Not Applicable 
 
6. Does the child have access to assistive technology (hearing aids, communication 
devices, etc.)? 
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
c. Not Applicable 
 
 
IV. Economic Capacity 
A. Family Income 
1. What is the primary source of income for the family? 
___________________________________________________________ 
 
2. How much is the approximate monthly income of the family?  __________ 
● Below minimum wage 
● Minimum wage 
● Above minimum wage 
 
B. Employment 
 
3. Are the parents/guardians employed or have entrepreneurial activities? 
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
If not, what is the reason for unemployment? 
● Lack of skills 
● Health reasons 
● Caregiving responsibilities 
● Others. Specify _______________________________________ 
 
 
V. Service Availment 
A. Social Services 
1. Does the family receive any form of financial assistance (government subsidies, 
medical assistance)? 
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
 
2. Is the family aware of available social services for children with disabilities? 
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
b. No 
 
3. Has the family availed of any services (therapy, financial support, special education 
programs, etc.)  
a. Yes 
Specify: _____________________________________________ 
 

 
b. No 
 
B. Barriers to Service Availment 
4. What are the challenges faced in availing these services? 
● Lack of information 
● Distance and transportation 
● Financial constraints 
● Prejudice and discrimination 
● Others, specify: ________________________________________ 
 
 
VI. General Observations and Recommendations 
 
A. Strengths: (e.g., supportive family, strong community network) 
 
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________ 
B. Assessment: 
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________ 
C. Recommended Actions/Interventions: 
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________ 
Scoring and Interpretation 
The assessment can be evaluated based on a scoring system to prioritize areas that require 
immediate action: 
Rating Scale Description 
1 Severe: 
The well-being of the child and family is at a critical level, requiring 
urgent and immediate intervention. The situation poses serious risks, 
such as unmet basic needs, lack of access to essential services (e.g., 
healthcare, education, therapy) 
Examples: 
● The child is unable to access critical medical or therapeutic care. 
● The family is experiencing severe financial instability, threatening, 
endangering, jeopardizing basic needs like housing or food. 
 
2 Moderate: 
The well-being of the child and family shows significant areas of 
concern that need to be addressed in the short term. While the situation 
is not as dire as severe cases, it could worsen if left unresolved. 
Improvement efforts are necessary to prevent escalation. 
Example: 
● The child has limited access to required services, or current 
services are inconsistent or inadequate. 
3 Low: 
The child and family’s well-being is generally adequate, with some minor 
 

 
issues or vulnerabilities that require attention but do not pose immediate 
risks. Regular monitoring and proactive measures can help maintain 
stability and prevent regression. 
Examples:  
● The child is receiving most necessary services but may need 
better access to specific supports (e.g., speech therapy, social 
inclusion programs). 
● The family is functioning well overall but faces occasional 
challenges (e.g., financial strain, minor caregiver stress). 
 
4 Stable: 
The child and family’s well-being is satisfactory and functioning as 
expected, with no major concerns. They have access to appropriate 
services, and their needs are met effectively. Regular monitoring ensures 
continued stability and progress. 
Examples: 
● The child is receiving consistent care and education tailored to 
their needs, with positive outcomes. 
● The family has a strong support network, sufficient resources, 
and effective coping strategies. 
 
1 - Severe: Immediate intervention needed 
2 - Moderate: Address within a short period 
3 - Low: No immediate action needed, but regular monitoring 
4 - Stable: Meets all needs effectively 
 
 
 
 

 
Appendix F 
 

 
NON DISCLOSURE AGREEMENT  
 
FOR GOOD CONSIDERATION, and in consideration of my service (professional and 
voluntary) with the Local Government Unit of [NAME OF LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE] 
under the Project Aruga, the undersigned hereby agrees and acknowledges: 
 
1) That during the course of my contract, there may be disclosed to me certain 
protected data of the LGU such as but not limited to: 
 
● Personal information: any information whether recorded in a material form or 
not, from which the identity of an individual is apparent or can be reasonably 
and directly ascertained by the entity holding the information, or when put 
together with other information would directly and certainly identify an 
individual. 
 
● Sensitive personal information refers to personal information:  
 
● About an individual’s race, ethnic origin, marital status, age, color, and 
religious, philosophical or political affiliations and type/s of 
disability/ies; 
 
● About an individual’s health, education, genetic or sexual life of a 
person, or to any proceeding for any offense committed or alleged to 
have been committed by such person, the disposal of such 
proceedings, or the sentence of any court in such proceedings; 
 
● Issued by government agencies peculiar to an individual which 
includes, but not limited to, social security numbers, previous or 
current health records, licenses or its denials, suspension or 
revocation, and tax returns; and 
 
● Specifically established by an executive order or an act of Congress 
to be kept classified 
 
2) I agree that I shall not during, or at any time after the termination of my contract with 
the [NAME OF LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE], use for myself or others, or disclose or 
divulge to others including future employees, any protected data, confidential 
information with or without label, or any other proprietary data of the [NAME OF 
LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE] in violation of this agreement. 
 
3) I agree that I shall follow/ observe the general guidelines when dealing with personal 
data as stated in the Data Privacy Act as specified in the Project’s Enhanced Pilot 
Implementation Guidelines: 
 
● The only people able to access data covered by this policy should be 
those who need it for social case management. 
 
● Data should not be shared informally. When access to confidential 
information is required, staff can request it from their designated Data 
Protection Officers. 
 
● Project Aruga staff should keep all data secure, by taking sensible 
precautions and following the guidelines below. 
 
a. Personal data that are digitally processed should be 
encrypted, whether at rest or in transit. Passwords or 
 

 
passphrases used to access personal data should be of 
sufficient strength to deter attacks, and they should never be 
shared. 
 
b. Transfers of personal data via electronic mail shall use a 
secure email facility with encryption of the data, including any 
or all attachments. 
 
c. Use of facsimile technology is not secure and should not be 
used for transmitting documents containing personal data. 
 
d. Personal data should not be disclosed to unauthorized people, 
either within the organization or externally. 
 
e. Data should be regularly reviewed and updated if it is found to 
be out of date. 
 
f. If no longer required, it should be archived, deleted and/or 
disposed of. 
 
g. Project Management Team/ Local Project Implementers 
should request help from their designated data protection 
officer if they are unsure about any aspect of data protection. 
 
4) That upon the termination of my contract from the LGU name: 
 
● I shall return to the [NAME OF LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE] all documents 
and property of the [NAME OF LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE], including but 
not necessarily limited to: accomplished forms, reports, manuals, 
correspondence, clients’ data, computer programs, and all other materials 
and all copies thereof relating in any way to the LGU/ Field Office operation, 
or in any way obtained by me during the course of my contract. I further 
agree that I shall not retain copies, notes or abstracts of the foregoing. 
 
● The [NAME OF LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE] may notify any future or 
prospective employer or third party of the existence of this agreement, and 
shall be entitled to full injunctive relief for any breach. 
 
5) This agreement shall be binding upon me and my personal representatives and 
successors in interest, and shall ensure to the benefit of the  [NAME OF LGU/ 
DSWD FIELD OFFICE], its successors and assigns; any breach of this agreement 
may be regarded as an infringement of the terms of the contract. 
 
● The  [NAME OF LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE] shall be entitled to seek 
remedies in the event that I have breached this agreement, or threatens to, in 
whole or in part. In such a case, the   [NAME OF LGU/ DSWD FIELD 
OFFICE] may enter into an amicable settlement with me. The  [NAME OF 
LGU/ DSWD FIELD OFFICE], however, reserves the right to pursue other 
remedies, including a claim for losses and damages should it determine that 
an amicable settlement would not serve its best interests. 
 
● That by affixing their signature, the Data Privacy Officer 
_______________________ and/or DSWD Regional Director of the 
____________________ shall ensure that the undersigned shall abide by 
this Non-Disclosure Agreement and by the principles and provisions of the 
Data Privacy Act of 2012. 
 

 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have indicated their acceptance of this Agreement by 
their signatures below on the dates specified. 
 
 
 
 
Conforme:  
 
 
 
__________________________________
_ 
Signature over Printed Name  
Date: ______________________________ 
 
  
Attested by:  
 
 
 
__________________________________
_ 
Signature over DPO/ DSWD RD’s Name  
Date: ______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 